---
title: "Fear in the Archive: Police Dossiers and the History of Emotions in Old
  Regime France"
author: Jeffrey Freedman
institution: Yeshiva University
volume: 13
year: "2016"
slug: police-dossiers-emotions-france
event:
  name: "Early Modern Workshop: Jewish History Resources"
  theme: History of Emotions/Emotions in History
language:
  - French
publication_location:
  - Paris
description: The following document is a police dossier drawn from the Y series
  of the Archives Nationales. Compiled by a neighborhood commissioner named
  Louis- Pierre Regnard, the dossier contains testimony pertaining to the case
  of François Fromard, a journeyman quarry worker who hanged himself in his
  apartment in a working-class neighborhood of Paris on 29 May 1750. According
  to the testimony of his wife and neighbors, Fromard saw police agents
  everywhere and, before taking his own life, had become convinced that he was
  going to be arrested and imprisoned. No one, however, gave any indication that
  the police were really pursuing him. The dangers he saw lurking all around him
  were figments of his imagination, or, as one witness eloquently described it,
  of his “wounded imagination” (_imagination blessée_).
---
<h2 style="text-align: center">Introduction</h2>

The following document is a police dossier drawn from the Y series of the Archives Nationales. Compiled by a neighborhood commissioner named Louis- Pierre Regnard, the dossier contains testimony pertaining to the case of François Fromard, a journeyman quarry worker who hanged himself in his apartment in a working-class neighborhood of Paris on 29 May 1750. According to the testimony of his wife and neighbors, Fromard saw police agents everywhere and, before taking his own life, had become convinced that he was going to be arrested and imprisoned. No one, however, gave any indication that the police were really pursuing him. The dangers he saw lurking all around him were figments of his imagination, or, as one witness eloquently described it, of his “wounded imagination” (_imagination blessée_).

Besides the case of Fromard, my research in the A. N. has turned up nine other cases from the last decades of the Old Regime in which individuals were said to have taken their own lives because they imagined that police agents, armed with arrest warrants, were pursuing them. I will present those dossiers as evidence for the emergence of a new culture of fear in Old Regime Paris, while exploring methodological issues of general significance for the history of emotions.

The eighteenth century has been a site of particularly intense interest for scholars working on the history of emotions, much of it bearing on the rise of “sentimentalism.” Nearly all that scholarship, however, falls loosely within the domain of intellectual history. It examines the representation and conceptual articulation of individual emotions or emotional regimes in philosophic, theological, and literary texts. Police dossiers offer a very different kind of evidence. Unlike the published sources on which historians of 18th-century emotions have concentrated, they do not strive to achieve emotional effects for rhetorical purposes, nor do they attempt to define emotions or prescribe emotional norms—they are primarily testimonial. The responses of Fromard’s family, friends, and neighbors testify to his fears by reporting what he said (“they’re coming to arrest me”) and what he did (staying home from work; running off at night). Intended only for the magistrates at the Châtelet court, such sources provide a different perspective on the lived experience of fear from that of literary or philosophic texts. In addition, because police investigations tend to focus on individuals from the lower orders of society, they allow us to broaden the history of emotions beyond the sphere of the upper classes and intellectual elites. Regnard’s investigation of Fromard’s suicide points us toward a world far removed from the salons, Masonic Lodges, and art exhibitions where sentimentalism was all the rage: the unruly, often violent world of the working-class _faubourgs_.

In what follows, I offer first my English translation of the dossier; then my transcription of the document in French. A photocopy of the original dossier from the Archives Nationales is contained in a separate file.

<h2 style="text-align: center">Source 1 Translation</h2><p style="text-align: center"><strong>Archives Nationales (France), Y 10860</strong></p>

29 May 1750, nine o’clock in the evening  
Marie Barbe Royer, the wife of François Fromard, journeyman quarry worker, residing in the rue Mouffetard in the parish of Saint Hyppolyte, came to us, Louis Pierre Regnard _lieutenant ordinaire_ of the king, commissioner of the Châtelet court in Paris, and former police official responsible for the neighborhood of the Place Maubert, at our residence. She told us \[i.e., Regnard\] that this morning she left her home at six o’clock in the morning to go to her work, as did her eldest children, and that she left behind in her room her husband, who was lying in bed, and her youngest son; returning from work between 7 and 8 o’clock in the morning and wishing to enter the room, she found the door ajar; from the first room into which she had entered she passed into a second; finding no one, she had the curiosity to go look in his bed if he was still lying there, but she did not see him; she went back into the first room with the intention of calling her son who was on the staircase and was coming back from outside; she was surprised to see her husband behind the door in the vicinity of the top hinge hanging from a cord that was attached to a nail hammered into the plaster partition; frightened by this sight, she immediately left the room to call for help; Benard, master grocer, Claude Dumas, and the wife of Morel came to her right away, and believing him to be still alive, cut him down from the place where he had been attached, but when he was cut loose and the cord untied, he showed no sign of life; his little boy then entered the room, having gone into town to buy some salt; he \[the boy\] reported that his father had sent him to get salt from a merchant near Saint Médard, and so he had left him alone in the room; \[Fromard’s wife testified\] that the feebleness of his mind had prevented him for some time from going to work in the quarry; that he had a deranged mind, and had frequently got it into his head that people wanted to arrest and imprison him, and sometimes cried out, “there they are, they’re coming to arrest me”; that she did all she could to restore him to his senses and calm him down, and that neighbors and even the priest, knowing his state, contributed as much as they could to calming him.

In light of the said accident, she believed that it was her duty to appear before us to make the present declaration and to have that declaration formally registered; that is why immediately afterward we went to the rue Mouffetard, entered a house belonging to the Sieur Devarenne, and went up to a room on the second floor with a view of the street occupied by the said François Fromard. The said wife of Fromard having indicated the place where she had found her husband, we observed that it was near the hinges of the door at the height of approximately six and a half feet; there were three nails, two with hooks and one in the middle with a head. Having approached the cadaver lying on the bed, we found it with its breeches and stockings, dressed in a shirt and wearing a cap, which the said witness \[i.e., the wife of Fromard\] said was the same state of dress in which she had found him hanging. In addition, we observed on the said cadaver a contusion around the neck. Thereupon we compiled this official report to serve for all legal purposes. \[Marie Royer\] signed. Thirteen words were crossed out.

\[Signed: Marie B. Royer; Regnard\]

We proceeded at the request of the king’s attorney to gather the following information.

Jean-Baptiste Benard, forty-three years old, master grocer in Paris residing in the rue Mouffetard parish of Saint Hippolyte, after swearing an oath to tell the truth, said that he was neither a servant nor domestic of any of the legal parties. The above official report having been read to him, he testifies that he had known the said Fromard for six years, that he has observed during this time that he \[Fromard\] did not have a calm mind and that he had something extraordinary in him, that he believed himself to be ill because he said that he had swallowed pins, that his deranged mind had grown continuously worse, and is the reason why since last December he almost stopped working at the quarry, that he had finally got it in his mind that people wished to arrest and imprison him; that yesterday, hearing the cries of the wife in the street regarding the accident that had befallen her husband, he, the witness, went up along with several others into the room of the said Fromard, whom he found behind the door next to the hinges, around his neck a cord suspended from the head of a nail at a height of about six and a half feet; that with the help of the others they cut him loose, believing that he was still alive, and observed that he was wearing a shirt, breeches and stockings on his legs, a woolen cap on his head—it was seven o’clock in the morning. That is all he said he knew. After his deposition had been read to him, he said that it contained the truth, stood by it, .... and signed.

\[Signed: Regnard; Benard\]

Claude Dumas, age thirty-one, fruit seller residing in the rue Mouffetard parish of Saint-Hippolyte, after having sworn to tell the truth, said that he was neither a family relation, servant or domestic of the legal parties.

The above official report having been read to him, he testifies that he has known Fromard for ten years, that roughly five or six years ago he observed that Fromard had a wounded imagination, believed himself to have swallowed pins and that he felt them piercing him in his stomach, that his speech was incoherent, and finally that he got it into his head that there were always police officials after him to arrest him; that yesterday at seven o’clock in the morning, hearing the mournful cries of his wife in the street who was calling for help, he went up with one of the neighbors to the room of the said Fromard, and there found Fromard a cord round his neck dangling from a nail behind the door of the first chamber, that he was still dressed in his shirt, breeches, and stockings, his shoes on the tiles beside him, that he \[Dumas\] believed him still to be alive; in order to administer aid to him, he and the others removed him from the nail to which he was attached and carried him to the bed, and observed that he was dead. That’s all he said he knew. After his deposition had been read to him, he said that it contained the truth, that he stood by it, .... and signed.

\[Signed: Regnard, Dumas\]

Marie-Therèse Dordet, age forty-two, wife of François Morel, officer in the Invalides, residing in the rue Mouffetard parish of Saint-Martin, after having sworn to tell the truth, said that she was neither a family relation, servant or domestic of the legal parties.

The above official report having been read to her, she testifies that she has known the said Fromard for fifteen years, that for the last five or six years she has observed that he had a feeble mind—he said he had swallowed pins and for that reason imagined himself to be ill; that the alienation of his mind increased to the point that he wandered off at night and that they were obliged to go after him; he was even so feebleminded as to imagine that people wanted to put him in prison, and he got it into his head that all the persons he saw passing were police agents there to seize him; that today at seven o’clock in the morning, hearing the wife of said Fromard crying for help in the street, she went up with several others from the neighborhood to the room where the wife told them to go quickly; there they found the said Fromard behind the door of the first chamber a cord round his neck dangling from a nail, attached to a plaster partition at a height of approximately six feet; in order to administer aid, believing him still to be alive, they quickly cut him loose and carried him to the bed, where they realized he was dead, that he was dressed in his shirt, breeches, and stockings, wearing a cap. That was all that she said she knew. After her deposition had been read to her, she said that it contained the truth, that she stood by it, ... and declared that she could neither write nor sign her name.

\[Signed: Regnard\]

After the above investigation, the cadaver of said Fromard stayed in the chamber where we were in the keeping and possession of said Marie Barbe Royer the widow, who assumed the responsibility for presenting the cadaver again if and when the court should order her to do so.