---
author: Pawel Maciejko
year: '2011'
volume: 8
slug: descend-abyss-jacob-frank
resource_link: []
publication_location: []
text_location: []
language:
  - Polish
tags: []
institution: Hebrew University of Jerusalem
event:
  name: 'Early Modern Workshop: Jewish History Resources'
  theme: 'Egodocuments: Revelation of the Self in the Early Modern Period'
  Date: {}
bibliography: {}
---
# Introduction

*Księga Słów Pańskich* (The book of the Words of the Lord) is a collection of Jacob Frank’s dicta. It contains Frank’s tales, fragments of biblical exegesis, records of dreams, descriptions of everyday events. It is an egodocument in a twofold sense. First, it contains a wealth of information concerning Frank’s personality and deeds. Second, and more importantly, it represents a conscious effort to create Frank’s persona. This persona can be best described by the term he most often applied to himself – that of a *prostak*.

The terms *prostak* (simpleton, boor) or *am ha-arets* (ignoramus) appear in virtually all accounts of Frankism. In polemical sources, these terms served, of course, to snub and debunk Frank: his rabbinic opponents maintained that his teachings were the maunderings of a blockhead, the babblings of an idiot, gibberish lacking any sense or substance. However, as even the rabbinic opponents of Frankism were quick to notice, for Frank’s followers the term had unequivocally positive connotations. *Sefer Shimush* explains that Frank’s boorishness was precisely the reason why the Sabbatians in the Ottoman Empire accepted his leadership:

(...) so they say that if a learned person (...) divulged the secret of the Torah nothing new would be revealed. Only an ignoramus (*am ha-arets*), young and unlettered, can know and understand everything. Frank is completely illiterate and knows nothing of kabbalah. Only when they ask something about the secrets of the Torah he falls on the ground, starts speaking the language of the Zohar, and reveals many things unknown.

Of course, Frank was never as uneducated as he claimed: many fragments of *The Book of the Words of the Lord* reveal substantial, if not systematic, knowledge of the fundamental texts of Judaism. Yet Frank took great pains to emphasize – and overemphasize – his rejection of any religious experience as superfluous and his conviction that religious knowledge (including the mystical knowledge based on existential experience as well as esoteric knowledge based on Kabbalah) is harmful.

# **Bibliography**

Gershom Scholem, “Redemption through Sin”, trans. Hillel Halkin, in idem, *The Messianic Idea in Judaism and Other Essays on Jewish Spirituality,* New York: Schocken, 1971: 78-141.\
Jan Doktór (ed.), *Księga słów Pańskich: Ezoteryczne wykłady Jakuba Franka*, Warsaw: Semper, 1997.

Paweł Maciejko, *The Mixed Multitude: Jacob Frank and the Frankist Movement 1755-1816*, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2011.\
Sergei Arkad'evich Ivanov, *Vizantyiskoye yurodstvo*, Moscow: NLO 1994.

# Source 1 Translation

### The Collecion of the Words of the Lord spoken in Bruenn

### 1770s-1780s

### [Jacob Frank]

### Biblioteka Jagiellońska, Kraków, Ms. 6968, 6969

1. I had a vision in Salonika. The following words were spoken to somebody: Go lead the wise Jacob into the chambers. When you come with him to the first chamber, I admonish you that all the doors and gates be opened to him. When I entered the first chamber, a rose was given to me as a sign by which I could go on to the next and so on *consequenter* from one room to the next. And so I flew in the air in the company of two maidens the beauty of whom the world has never seen. In these chambers I saw mainly women and young ladies. In some, however, there were groups of students and teachers, and whenever the first word was spoken to me, I immediately grasped from it the whole matter and the full meaning. The number of these rooms was innumerable; in the final one I saw the First [Sabbatai Tsevi] who also sat as a teacher with his students, dressed in *frenkish* clothing. He immediately asked me: Are you the wise Jacob? I have heard that you are strong and brave-hearted. I was walking this path, but have no strength to go any farther; if you want, you must strengthen yourself and may God help you, for great many ancestors took that burden upon themselves, went on this road, but fell. Then he showed me through the window an abyss which was like the Black Sea, clothed in extraordinary darkness, and on the other side of the abyss I saw a mountain which seemed to touch the clouds. And so I shouted, Be that as it may, I will go with God's help! And so I began to fly on a slant through the air into the abyss until I reached its very bottom, where, having touched the ground, I stopped. Walking in the dark, I came to the edge of the mountain. I realized that because of the steep smoothness of the mountain it will be very difficult to climb it. I will be forced to clamber up with my nails and use all my strength until I reach the top. As soon as I stopped there, a beautiful scent surrounded me and I saw many True-Believers. Seized by great joy, I did not yet want to climb to the very top of the mountain, saying to myself: I will rest awhile here. And sweat poured from my head like a river in flood because of the effort I made in order to climb this mountain. When I am well rested, then I will come up on the mountain towards all the good which is found there. And this is what I did: I let my feet hang down and sat with my body and hands on the mountain. Then I went up to the top of the mountain.
1. As I told you before, when I was taken to the rooms where all the kings and Patriarchs of Israel were, they told me: Jacob, we have come so far, from here you must go on alone. I am a *prostak* - I answered - and have no wisdom; how will I go there? Don't worry about that - they answered – it doesn’t matter, for wisdom is hidden in the lowest of places. Nevertheless, I still held back. Suddenly the First, having put me on a table and having opened the window, showed me an abyss, saying: Look at this impassable place. We cannot go there, but you, if you hadn’t held back, would have less difficulty in passing your road. Yet since you delay you must suffer great sufferings. At that time I saw all the burdens, which I will have to take upon myself. And so I was pushed into that abyss.

34.... What kind of an achievement would it be, if God lead the world with wise men and scholars? God wants to come forth in this world only with the meanests and the lowest, so that his power will be demonstrated. Just consider and look at me, there was no greater *prostak* than I, who was as if deprived of any sense; but wisdom, as I said, comes forth from nothing. When, at the age of 18, I was in Bucharest at the house of a certain lady, who was 24 years old, I had with me spools of gold and silver worth 100 #. I sold them to her for 500 #. This greatly amazed me, yet not thinking much about it I hid the money and went my way, saying to myself: if she gives me voluntarily, why shouldn't I take it? The lady was very rich. She had about 1200 servants, all of them young people, especially chosen. Her husband was not present at that time and was away at his estates. She summoned me and asked me to sit near her. I did so and I saw that the servants started to slip out of the room one by one, till I was left alone with her. The servants closed the doors behind them and the lady began to persuade me that I should spend the night with her, and demanded that I satisfy her desire. She offered 1000 sacks of _lev_s, saying that if I agree to do that voluntarily and willingly then I'll be given *in dublo*. Look how many handsome and attractive slaves I have here, but I want only you, and already tonight. If in the future you have a desire for me, I will not deny you, but my need and desire must absolutely be quenched this night. I wanted to run away, but all the gates were locked. Then she said: if you don't do it willingly, you will be forced to do it. Then I realized: if I break the window and jump out, then I will make much noise. In a word, gathering all my valuables, I asked her to keep them and asked her permission to go out to the porch, to which she agreed and came out with me. That porch was very high above the ground and the yard was full of sharpened poles; beyond the poles the river flowed. At tried to understand how far I would have to jump to reach the water, and so, throwing off my shirt, I jumped straight into the water, and, swimming away, I went home. The following day I went to her and got back my valuables and my shirt. I did all this because I am a *prostak*. A long time thereafter, I was told that she was a great astrologer and, having recognized me, desperately wanted to have union with me.

35. Once I was traveling with my business partner through some villages. He ran into peasants to whom he owed money, so they stopped us. I wanted to fight them, but they said: We have no issue with you, it is the other one who owes us 900 *levs*. My partner knew that I had 600 *levs* with me. The peasants tied the debtor up and he began to lament saying, Jacob, for God's sake, give me 400 *levs*, this will satisfy them and I will go free. As soon as I get home I'll take my wife's corals, worth 100 #, and I will give them to you. I agreed to it and gave him the money. When we go back home, I asked for the corals. My partner answered: my wife is sleeping now, tomorrow morning I'll give them to you, and for the kindness you did me, I will also give you an cart with iron wheels, which is at my father's. In the morning my partner fled with his wife and everything he had in the house. I went to his father with the note, which he had given me to take the cart, but it wasn't given me. His father told me that his son owed him more money and put the wagon in the yard surrounded with a high fence. At midnight I came there with two ladders. I tied them together and put them against the fence. I took the cart weighing 100 *ok* on my back, carried it over the fence, and, having descended the ladder with it, I carried it on my back for half a mile to Romani. The father ran after me but everybody denied him the cart saying that his son had done me greater damage by taking the 400 *levs*. This was the second display of my simplicity.
1. Having come to the river Totroz, I found there 150 wagons, standing on the shore, afraid to go farther because of the high water. Without saying anything, I took my robes, put it and my sacks on my head, and, in spite of the most terrible danger, I swam across the river with my horse. From the other shore, people shouted at me: ‘What are you doing?’ ‘For God's sake why do you take such a risk?’ Listening to no one, I swam across and on the same day I travelled 6 miles to Romani. The people had to wait there 11 days. When they reached Romani, they asked about me and were shocked seeing me alive. And my simplicity did this.
1. I was ordered to go to Poland, but I did not want to do it saying: ‘How can I, such a prostak, go on this path. There are here two scholars, Rabbi Issohar and Mardoch. Let them go’. So I was told: ‘They won't listen to your advice here, you are chosen by God.’ When I still was unwilling, then they began to throw stones at me. And since you are holding back, it was said, you will have to go in poverty. If you delayed more, then you would have been led chains. You must do what is necessary. As for your heart, it is free and can do whatever you like. I was only shown the places and paths which I will have to tread, and all obstacles that I will face. And I was told: You are Jacob, don't be afraid of anything, do everything wherever your hand reaches.
1. In [17]59 the Lord said in Iwanie, There was a man who had a pearl of inestimable value. It had not been pierced. He went with it from one great city to another searching for a master who could make a hole through it, promising to pay him lots of money for the work, if he undertook to do it without doing any. None of the greatest masters wanted to undertake the job. Finally, he was offering 1000 # for the work, but no one would dare do it. Not being able to do anything with his pearl, he went to an apprentice whose master left his house, and without warning him of the danger of perforating a pearl, said: Take this pearl and drill me a hole through it; I will pay you well for it. The apprentice took the pearl and drilled a hole through it fearlessly. The man paid him well and, fully satisfied, went on his way. Thus it is here. Many wise men wanted to drill but could not, because they were afraid, but I was chosen, because I am a *prostak*, who with the help of my God, will drill through everything and will lead to everything.
1. As see me before you as a *prostak,* you should have concluded from that that all laws and teachings will fall. If scholars were needed then they would have sent you one who knows everything.
1. That same witty Jew, on seeing 12 pullets roasting on a spit at the home of another Jew, asked me: ‘Jacob, how do you want me to pay you to eat all these 12 pullets? 12 *ok*, I answered. I sat down and ate all 12 of the pullets. The owner came with his wife screaming: ‘What are you doing?!’ But I pushed them all out, saying, that I was hired to do so, because I was a *prostak* and did not understand their anger. I merely thought that I should do what I was hired to do. Having eaten, I went home for dinner. The Jew followed me and asked: but Jacob, you just ate. How come that you are going to eat dinner again? I replied: my first eating was for pay, and only now I am going to eat my own dinner.
1. I chose you and I wanted to lead you to a place which is not yet known to any man. Even though they would be displeased there, I would turn it into a joke. Only to shorten the road, like I told about what I did to the king in Jassy. Several times I sent supplications through his ministers but they did not reach him and my pleas was never shown to him. So I acted like a fool and, having caught him by the robe, I told him: I made you a king over this land and you pay no attention that justice be done; if it will continue to be so, you will no longer be king. The king and his ministers laughed at that. Then I gave him a supplication. Then, having read it, he rendered me justice. Therefore I was chosen, for I am a *prostak* and no other, learned, wise, and proud could have performed such a trick.
1. In my youth my member was so lively that when a man wanted to climb a tree I erected it for him, and he stood onto it, and he climbed the tree. Also in the coldest water it would still stand. And when I went among the maidens I had to tie it up, because otherwise it would pierce through my trousers.
1. I was a *prostak* and did not even know when the Shabbat fell, for I lived among Christians. A woman brought me a loaf of bread on Friday evening and I knew from that that it will be Shabbat tomorrow. I understood that the bread meant the Shabbat. Once the woman fell ill and did not bring me the bread, so I failed too to celebrate the Shabbat. I went around in everyday clothes, opened the shop, and all the merchants were laughing and that I did not keep the Shabbat. Having seen it, the Jews said: Today is the Shabbat!. What are you doing?! I asked them, But how come, I was not brought bread. How is it Shabbat? They gave me to understand that the bread is not Sabbath, but that one invisible thing comes and that is called Shabbat. I told this occurrence to my father. He answered: Do not worry, for sometimes the Shabbat goes off and hides.
1. In my youth I traveled to a village, where nobody ever saw a Jew. I came to an inn where young boys and farm-hands gathered. The girls were spinning there and the boys were telling them stories to amuse them. When they saw me, one of them began to mock me and make fun of me in order to make me angry. He said: Once the Jewish God and the Christian God went for a walk. The Christian God punched the Jewish God in the snout, saying: Why do you wear on your head what I wear on my feet? --I said to them: I also tell you a story. Once St. Mahomet and St. Peter once went for a walk. Mahomet said to Peter: I have a great lust to fuck you the Turkish way. Peter didn't want to, but Mahomet was strong, and tied him to a tree, and had his way. Peter screamed for his butt hurt: I will accept you as a saint, but don't do that to me. Thereafter the farm-hand said: You know what? We will make peace among us. We won't say anything of your God and you don't say anything against our St. Peter.
1. I cannot explain to you what confusion there is now in the world. Just as you yourselves see, that your understanding is muddled, so the thinking of all the kings will become confused. Thus I, a *prostak*, have been chosen, and cast among them as it clearly stands: Before him kings will close their mouths.
1. I was a *prostak* and didn't know anything but the verse: *Szama Isruel Adonai Elohaini, Adonai ehet.* Hear o Israel, our God, one God. When I was fighting a powerful robber, I screamed out that verse. When I pronounced the word *ehet,* one, I cut off his, so I said to myself that the *Echet* cut off his head.
