---
title: "Johan Kemper's (Moses Aaron's) Humble Account: A Rabbi between
  Sabbateanism and Christianity"
author: Niels Eggerz
institution: Hebrew University of Jerusalem
volume: 12
year: "2015"
slug: rabbi-sabbateanism-christianity
event:
  name: "Early Modern Workshop: Jewish History Resources"
  theme: Continuity and Change in the Jewish Communities of the Early Eighteenth
    Century
language:
  - German
publication_location:
  - Schweinfurt
description: Moses Aaron of Krakow, a Sabbatean rabbi, who would later call
  himself Johan Kemper, chose to convert to Christianity in the summer of 1696.
  When his mentor, the Lutheran cleric Johann Friedrich Heunisch, brought his
  mentee's wish before the council of the Free Imperial City of Schweinfurt,
  Kemper was asked to submit the reasons for his request together with a short
  autobiography in written form. The outcome was his _Humble Account_, which
  appeared in print shorty after Kemper was baptized. A close analysis of
  Kemper's _Humble Account_ reveals a very subtle yet pronounced anti-Jewish
  narrative which makes use of well-established early modern stereotypes of Jews
  and Judaism on the one hand and standard theological arguments on the other
  hand. The autobiography is nevertheless more than a mediocre anti-Jewish
  polemical treatise, for it not only features one of the rare descriptions of
  the lesser known Sabbatean messianic upheaval of 1695, which was caused by the
  prophecies of a certain Rabbi Zadok of Grodno, but it also seems that some of
  Kemper’s own remarks have escaped the censorship of his friend and mentor and
  thus allow a glimpse into Kemper’s own perception of his conversion.
---
<h2 style="text-align: center">Introduction</h2>

Moses Aaron of Krakow, a Sabbatean rabbi, who would later call himself Johan Kemper, chose to convert to Christianity in the summer of 1696. When his mentor, the Lutheran cleric Johann Friedrich Heunisch, brought his mentee's wish before the council of the Free Imperial City of Schweinfurt, Kemper was asked to submit the reasons for his request together with a short autobiography in written form. The outcome was his _Humble Account_, which appeared in print shorty after Kemper was baptized. It is thus a somewhat typical example of the literary genre of convert autobiographies, which was quite popular in early modern Germany. These autobiographies or alternatively apologies served a twofold purpose: They were firstly to prove the convert's sincerity and secondly to show the alleged superiority of Christianity over Judaism. It is precisely for this twofold aim that these writings have to be regarded as highly problematic with regards to the factual information contained therein. In many instances it is not even clear if the respective convert wrote his own autobiography/apology all by himself, which likely also holds true in the case of Kemper. This does however not mean that these texts are useless as historical sources; for they contain valuable information both on each individual case and on broader intellectual currents as well, if read with the appropriate precaution. A close analysis of Kemper's _Humble Account_ reveals a very subtle yet pronounced anti-Jewish narrative which makes use of well-established early modern stereotypes of Jews and Judaism on the one hand and standard theological arguments on the other hand. The autobiography is nevertheless more than a mediocre anti-Jewish polemical treatise, for it not only features one of the rare descriptions of the lesser known Sabbatean messianic upheaval of 1695, which was caused by the prophecies of a certain Rabbi Zadok of Grodno, but it also seems that some of Kemper’s own remarks have escaped the censorship of his friend and mentor and thus allow a glimpse into Kemper’s own perception of his conversion.

**Bibliography**

Asulin, Shifra. “Another Glance at Sabbatianism, Conversion, and Hebraism in 17th-Century Europe: Scrutinizing the Character of Johan Kempper of Uppsala, or Moshe Son of Aharon of Krakow (Hebrew).” In _The Sabbatian movement and its aftermath: Messianism, Sabbatianism and Frankism_ (Hebrew), edited by Rachel Elior, 2:423–470. Jerusalem: The Mandel Institute of Jewish Studies, 2000.

Carlebach, Elisheva. Divided Souls: _Converts from Judaism in Germany, 1500–1750_. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2001, 67–123.

Eskhult, Josef. _Andreas Norrelius’ Latin Translation of Johan Kemper’s Hebrew Commentary on Matthew: Edited with Introduction and Philological Commentary_. Acta Universitatis Upsalienis. Studia Latina Upsaliensia Vol. 32. Uppsala: Uppsala Universitet, 2007, 309– 324.

Schoeps, Hans Joachim. ““Rabbi” Johan Kemper in Uppsala: ein Beitrag zur Geschichte und Theologie der Sabbatianer.” _Kyrkohistorisk Årsskrift_ 46 (1946): 146–177. \[Republished in Schoeps, Hans Joachim. _Philosemitismus im Barock: religions- und geistesgeschichtliche Untersuchungen_. Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 1952, 92–133.\]

Wolfson, Elliot R. “Angelic Embodiment and the Feminine Representation of Jesus: Reconstructing Carnality in the Christian Kabbalah of Johann Kemper.” In _The Jewish Body: Corporeality, Society, and Identity in the Renaissance and Early Modern Period_. Edited by Giuseppe Veltri & Maria Diemling, 395–426. Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2009.

–––––. “Messianism in the Christian Kabbalah of Johann Kemper.” In _Jewish Messianism in the Early Modern World_. Edited by Richard H. Popkin & Matt D. Goldish, 139–187. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2001.

<h2 style="text-align: center">Source 1 Translation</h2><p style="text-align: center"><strong>Aaron, Moses (Johan Kemper). <em>Unterthäniger Bericht An einen Hoch-Edlen und Hoch- Weisen Rath zu Schweinfurth Von der wunderlichen Güte GOttes, welche Er, der Allerhöchste erwiesen mir armen Menschen, Mosi Aaron, einem durch GOttes Gnad bekehrten Rabbi, auß Crackau gebürtig, Nechst Angehengter demüthigen Bitt Ihm die heilige Tauff wiederfahren zu lassen</em>. Schweinfurt: Johann Christoph Drechsler, 1696.</strong></p>

Start My birth town was to be the famous Krakow which has continually been home to over 2000 Jews, among them the noblest rabbis who usually have spread from there over all of Germany. The blessed Jewish city is, however, separated from the Christian one in such a way that there is hardly any contact between the Jews and the local Christians.

But God made me a fatherless orphan already in my second year of age and thus my upbringing became a too bitter burden for my poor mother who had heartily taken care of me at all times. I had however hardly reached the fifth year of age when the great and wonderful God said unto me as he had said unto Abraham _Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a land that I will shew thee_ (Gen. XII:1). For God afflicted the named city of Krakow with a fierce pestilence since the Talmud orders everyone to flee as quickly and as far away as he is able. My mother therefore hasted with me to Auspitz, where I was raised among the Christians for a time.

I may well say that the merciful Father in Heaven gave me the first sign of my conversion at this very place. For there I learnt to utter the sweet name JESUS for the first time, even though I did not grasp the meaning of this name and although it is the one to which Jacob alluded with the first letters ישו when saying יבא שילה ולו (Gen.XLIX), I still felt a peculiar strength in my heart with the result that I uttered it frequently, for which my mother chastised me severely.

Again God was soon to show his mercy to me, the then underage child, to an even greater extent. For I have to ascribe it to Him that a very famous Rabbi, a certain Rabbi Abraham Bisch from Nickelsberg, embosomed me so greatly that he did not only accommodate me in his school, but also told me frequently: I want to teach you something that only a few among us know. This was the _Basuck_, or the Holy Bible, for there are many rabbis who have never read the whole Bible and the Prophets. Whenever the other students engaged in idle games, the above named rabbi studied the Bible with me and this was my true _Chevziba_, my eyes' and my heart's desire.

There I delighted myself with the obvious prophecies regarding the Lord Messiah, which I could however not fully understand then. Nonetheless, I had hesitations because of these prophecies that would not allow me to find peace of mind. I had to partially unburden them to my mother. I considered that the Christians might be right. The Messiah must have arrived by now. The scepter of Judah has departed \[from Israel\] and the legislative body, the entire Sanhedrin, ceased to exist long ago: the Second Temple, which was to be elevated over the First Temple of Solomon, to which it was otherwise not at all comparable, through the advent and presence of the One who was to be the solace of all Gentiles, was destroyed long ago, as well as Bethlehem, the native town of the Lord Messiah. The lineages have intermingled and I regard what they keep on telling us eloquently about the ten tribes enclosed by the _Sabbatjon_ River as a futile dream. How does it come that we have not heard any tidings thereof throughout all these years from the _Gojim_, who are allowed to travel on the Sabbath, when the named river is supposed to be inactive? And where is such a country to be located, which cannot be found by anyone, even now after the entire World has been traversed by the Christians. I cannot find in the Scripture that the Messiah dwells in Rome among the lazars, but I do however find that he is supposed to suffer, die, and to be resurrected for us. I already back then delighted in the words of Psalm LXXII:14: _Precious shall their blood_, namely the blood of the fallen sinners, _be for Him_, which is to say for the Lord Messiah and his Father, for he will therefore shed his own precious blood (1Pet. I:19).

I showed my mother that according to the Talmud the world was supposed to exist for 6000 years. 2000 years were to pass without the law, 2000 years with the law and 2000 years were to last the days of the Messiah. Where have they been? I said, as the named 4000 years have long since passed. I also found the triune Godhead both in the Bible and in the Talmud. For should it be without any reason that the Seraphim proclaim not twice, not four nor five times, but thrice _holy, holy, holy_ (Isa. VI), which an old Rab. Simeon himself explained, just as I found it later in the works of Galatinus (I.2.C.1). Holy is the Father, holy is the Son, holy is the Spirit. Aaron and his sons had to bless the children of Israel in the name of this triune God saying: _The LORD_, this is God the Father, _bless thee, and keep thee. The LORD_, this is God the Son, _make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee. The LORD_, this is God the Holy Spirit, _lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace_ (Num. VI:23). Also Daniel turned to this triune God when he called out thrice: _O LORD, hear; O LORD, forgive; O LORD, hearken and do_ (Dan. IX:19). God is however one (Deut. VI:4). I again compare Him to a tree with three branches, if one is supposed to employ allegories altogether in the field of such sublime mysteries. For that is the nature of a deity in three persons. And why is it written in the Talmud that the world is closed on three sides whereas the fourth side is open _Laatid lavo_? The Talmud speaks about the future, when God will judge, then he will say: If there is another god besides me, he should close the fourth side. I ask myself, why did God close three sides? Why did he not leave two open? I believe that also this is a hint to the three persons. If a fourth one wants to join, he should close the fourth side.

It would be too extensive, if I wanted to mention all of the things that seemed questionable to me already then, and which I candidly disclosed to mother one after the other as I have already mentioned. But it caused her only sorrow and distress. She wept bitterly over this and said: I have only one child and of all things he has to make me experience disgrace! She had many sleepless nights because of that and caused me great suffering as well. This was the first obstacle which I encountered with my conversion.

She thought I should be instructed in this matter and in the Talmud more thoroughly and she therefore sent me to her brother, who taught me with great diligence for half a year. Although I had not abandoned my erstwhile intention to adopt Christianity, but rather reflected on the matter better and better, I nevertheless encountered the second obstacle upon my return. For my mother coaxed me to take a wife, since it is customary among the Jews that learned men marry at a young age, because the Talmud says: Whoever enters into matrimony before the age of 18 shoots out an eye of the _Jezer hara_, which is the evil inclination. I did not only promise her to do so, but I had my wedding with Siphra, the daughter of a certain Rabbi Barach from Silesia, with whom I stayed for half a year. It is however common practice that learned men continue with their studies after they have married and I thus betook myself with the blessings of my loved ones to Fulda, where I sojourned for three years. I then returned to my wife and fathered a son named Aaron with her, whom God may enlighten and lead to Christ along with his mother.

In the meantime the year was 1695 A.D., the rumor that the Messiah was finally about to come spread among the Jews. A great fast day was proclaimed in all of Poland, Silesia, Moravia, and Bohemia, and everyone was advised to prepare for the arrival of the Messiah. This had been brought about by a Jew from Lithuania named Rabbi Zadok, who it was claimed could work signs and wonders. The kabbalists cited inter alia Gen. II:21 ויסגור בשר תחתנה as evidence, whereby they interpreted the word בשר as meaning the good news of the arrival of the Messiah. The word תח תנה was divided in such a way that the first two letters were supposed to indicate the 408th year which had witnessed rumors about the arrival of the Messiah as well and which by then was 30 years past. The number of the remaining letters indicated the then current year of the Jewish calendar. I could quote a plethora of similar kabbalistic arguments with which they toyed back then. The rabbis professed that a profound darkness would befall the sky (I think that their hearts, minds, and senses are darkened, for they do not want to see, perceive or walk in the light of the true Shechina, the splendor of God's glory, the great light, which has come into the world to enlighten everyone, the Lord Messiah). Finally, the Messiah was supposed to arrive and reveal himself after this darkness had lasted for three days. I plagued my own body with extensive fasting, praying, and ritual immersions and I thought to myself frequently: How good it is that you paid heed to your mother's words and you haven't converted your faith and become a Christian, because in this case you would have been forced from now on to chop wood, carry water or do other such menial labor, for according to rabbinic doctrine even the lot of the princes, dukes and lords of the Christians will not be any better off in the days of the Messiah.

Finally after a long wait the long-desired day had arrived. It was the 5th of September, which proved to be somewhat dark in the beginning, wherefore the rabbis lighted their lamps with great joy and supposed that the great signs would be seen in the sky now. They also sealed all the chinks, gaps, and holes in their houses while they eloquently related that a venomous haze was about to fall, which would bring death upon all those who inhaled it. But while they were still hoping in vain, instead of a venomous haze the sun broke through the clouds and it turned out to be such a lovely day that all creatures (except for the Jews) were happy. With that, the repeated deceit became apparent and the rabbis were only anxious about how they could palliate this deceit. The Christian clergymen, however, did not conceal this incident, but preached about it in public. The above named Lithuanian Jew was excommunicated as one who is in league with the devil.

I once more unburdened my heart to my mother in written form and showed her emphatically how many times we had already been deceived, whereas the name JESUS had spread throughout the entire world. Thereupon she was fully convinced that I would henceforth abandon Judaism and traveled therefore with great haste from Krakow to Silesia and begged me again with tears, as I had expected, to refrain from disgracing her and her family by apostatizing. Thanks be to God alone who led me, Moses, to the point at which I in accordance with the great Moses _esteem the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt_, nay in the entire world (Heb. XXI:26). Meanwhile my mother stayed with me until I again departed for Franconia, determined to travel to Fulda again. In the meantime, however, I found a good opportunity in Niederwähren, where I conducted myself modestly for one year, so truly no-one could accuse me of any misdeed, and I delight in the fact that Magister Heunisch, prior to housing me, frequently inquired among the Jews about all my doings without my knowledge. They related however at all times nothing but kind and good things about me.

\[...\]

Because I lodged with him and saw how the Christians lived, with how much devotion they prayed to God and how confident and happy they were with their Christianity, how merry they were when they sang and talked about divine matters, etc. my heart was deeply moved and my eyes were opened for more things daily. Therefore I found no rest, day or night, but I still could not bring myself to convert to Christianity, I also still followed Jewish practice in matters of food and drink adamantly. Meanwhile we frequently conversed, especially while sitting in the garden in the evenings, about Christian matters of faith and I still remember well how the tulips, which were flowering merrily back then, caused us to talk about the resurrection of the dead and the transfigured bodies of the chosen. Nevertheless I still tried, as well as I could, to claim that rabbinic and Talmudic doctrine stated oftentimes that no-one could understand the Bible without the Talmud. That lead us to yet another matter of dispute, namely the question of upon what one should base his answers to such important questions of faith. It was indicated to me in all modesty that Judaism was built on a sandy foundation. The Jews regard Scripture as something opaque and imperfect that no one can understand without the Talmud. But what is the Talmud? A voluminous book, whose language is not the Holy Tongue and which was not written by infallible prophets hailing from the divine wellspring, but by people – or at least compiled from their notes – who overindulged in wrath and vindictiveness to such an extent that they killed their foemen with their eyes, as did Rabbi Jochanan to Rabbi Kaina, \[...\] Furthermore, it is said that Rabbi Simeon Ben Jochai, who is famous because of the Book Zohar and the Talmud, did so. \[...\] How is it possible that the spirit of God rests upon such haughty and vengeful people?

The Talmud was written by such people, who know how to subjugate the devil at will. About them and about other vices of the Rabbis who have contributed to the Talmud can be read in the book _Der Jüden Talmud_ part 2, chapter 17, fol. 526 by the persistent Gerson. Where do you read something of that kind about Moses, the man of God, or any of the other Prophets? Rabbi Moses Bar Nachman is said to have learned a similar art from an old man whom Mr. D\[octor\] Müller in his _Judenthum_ fol. 55 however regards as the old master of a thousand arts, the old snake, which tempted our first parents to evil and which was already evil when God saw everything that he had made in the days of creation and said that everything was very good (Gen. I).

Since I have dwelled hitherto with you, Most Esteemed Gentlemen, it was frequently pointed out to me that Jewry was a rather destitute crowd. Neither do they find solace in their faith nor in their prayers, for they have no understanding of either. I asked a well-known Jew in the presence of M\[agister\] Heunisch, what he was praying upon washing his hands. He uttered the prayer swiftly, but when I asked him, what _Netilat Jadaim_ meant, for which he had prayed to God, he fell silent like a fish. They do not find solace in their prayer service, which they execute without devotion and in such a way that one must be irritated by them. E. g. they have a day of fast and repentance that is called _Tischa Baav_ and which they are supposed to observe with a penitent and compunctious heart. This day was instituted because of the destruction of the city of Jerusalem, which is certainly a reason for them to grieve. That is to say that I firmly believe that they deserved this destruction for \[the destruction that they inflicted upon\] our LORD Christ. But one should only see his aversion to the way they observe the named day of penitence. They are supposed to sit on the floor the whole day, not to put on shoes, to fast, to pray, and to attempt to halt the castigations of the just God. But someone who comes to their synagogue on such a day, will find one lying on the floor and sleeping, a second one singing a song of lamentation, and a third one laughing. The boys go hither and thither, stitch those who sleep with needles, play antics, and comport themselves disgracefully in such a way as if they were not, just like they imagine, in a house of God but in such a licentious house, in which all wantonness was approved of. I punished them often on account of this and said that it was against the word of God and the Talmud, but I was derided thereupon. It has come to that with today's Jews that they keep the word of God and the Talmud, when they wish to. If it does not please them, they deviate from both, of which I will God willing show more at another time.

\[...\]

But I still incessantly opposed \[every argument\] to the best of my ability. I was once reading the second Psalm with my landlady in order to exercise myself in reading, when I encountered the words: Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee etc., it was as if my heart was struck \[with bafflement\]. I also paused and was thereupon asked whether I could not continue. I said: Yes, but what is it? I was answered: This has to be understood with regards to our Lord Jesus, who is the only begotten son of God, whom the Father eternally begot in a way which is unintelligible for us, and to whom he gave the uttermost parts of the earth for a possession. Thereupon I again objected vigorously and made the matter ultimately depend on what the M\[agister\] would say thereunto, who also summoned me, after he had returned home from visiting a sick man, and showed me from the Targum and from _Abenesra_ the deceit of _Beer Mosche_ and that _Jalad_ certainly meant to beget according to essence and not to ennoble etc. Although I objected again that time with all my might, I found no sleep all night thereafter and I was finally coerced doubtlessly by the Holy Spirit to reveal my heart to the M\[agister\], which I did with a letter early in the morning, whereupon I sensed well that these were to be unhoped-for tidings for him. But he congratulated me wholeheartedly on my spiritual change and urged me to be persistent and thereby assured me that the most noble council as well as the honorable clergy would provide both for my temporal and for my eternal wellbeing as I have indeed hitherto already experienced sufficiently. I will praise this on that day in front of the Triune God whom I acknowledge and will ask for eternal recompense for all my noble benefactors.

\[...\]

And God opened the door of Paradise for me whilst calling unto me so to speak: _Adam, where art thou_? Thereupon my eyes were opened for the Holy Books and I became aware of my own nakedness with regards to belief, for I had not been robed yet in in the true robe of honor, namely the Blood of Christ. I, wretched man, heard the voice of God in Paradise and was afraid, but God, the Holy Spirit, moved within me and said: Go and eat from the Tree of Knowledge, which means, delve deeper in the Holy Bible, in the pure mirror, which is the Tree of Eternal Life, whoever eats from it will inherit eternal salvation. The true Tree of Life, which is shown therein, is the tree with three branches, the one God in Three Persons \[...\]. Herewith I conclude in confident trust that you will promote my matter the sooner the better and that you will not leave my hands empty. For it also says in the Talmud: Whoever preserves a single Israelite soul helps to build the entire world.