---
title: "The Religious Condition of German Jewries in the First Half of the 18th
  Century: Rural and Urban Communities in Comparison"
author: Avi Siluk
institution: Goethe University Frankfurt on the Main
volume: 12
year: "2015"
slug: religious-condition-german-jewries
event:
  name: "Early Modern Workshop: Jewish History Resources"
  theme: Continuity and Change in the Jewish Communities of the Early Eighteenth
    Century
language:
  - German
publication_location:
  - Celle and Halle (Source 1 and 2)
  - Frankfurt-on-Main (Source 3)
text_location:
  - Hamburg
  - London
  - Amsterdam
description: This presentation focuses on Jewish attitudes towards non-Jews in
  the first half of the 18th century as depicted in the travelling journals of
  Pietist missionaries. If up to that point, interreligious encounter had been a
  field of interaction between Jewish and Christian scholars, in the 18th
  century the missionaries began to engage in conversations on faith with Jews
  of all social strata, genders, ages and educational backgrounds. Such
  interactions yielded many different forms of individual and communal Jewish
  reactions. Examining cases of missionary encounters with the large urban Jewry
  of Frankfurt (Main) and the smaller, rural *kehilah* of Celle (in the
  Principality of Hanover), I will discuss the different levels of openness Jews
  displayed in their interaction with the missionaries and their connection to
  the respective communal structure and living conditions of each settlement. In
  addition, I will show that, in contrast to older views, one should not confuse
  the openness of Jews towards their Christian environment with a decrease in
  faith, a decline in communal cohesion, or a dissolution of traditional
  structures. Finally, I will contrast the findings on the religious condition
  of the Jewry of Celle with the critique on the matter made by Isaak Wetzlar,
  the author of the ‘Libes briv’ (see the presentation by Rebekka Voß) and a
  member of the Celle *kehilah*.
footnotes:
  - ref: "[^1]"
    rich-text: "TEST The book is also known as ספר עמודי עולם. See MORRIS
      FAIERSTEIN: The Libes Briv of Isaac Wetzlar, Atlanta 1996. See also the
      presentation by Rebekka Voß: Striking a Pietist Chord: Isaac Wetzlar’s
      Proposal for the Improvement of Jewish Society.  "
---
# Introduction

The following extracts are taken from the travel diaries of two Pietist missionaries of the *Institutum Judaicum et Muhammedicum* in the Prussian city of Halle (Saale) who journeyed throughout the Holy Roman Empire as well as to several other Europeans countries such as Poland, the Netherlands, Denmark and England in the 1730s. They visited numerous Jewish communities in big cities like Hamburg, London or Amsterdam, as well as in small towns and in even smaller villages. In their journals, the ‘studiosi’ recount their encounters with Jews and their conversations with them. In order to achieve their goal of convincing the Jews to accept the Christian truth, they used the German-Jewish vernacular in their conversations, avoided polemic attacks and argued primarily with the Old Testament and rabbinical sources. Although the testimonies of the missionaries represent outside reflections on Jewish life and are not free from biased judgments, they did not seek to demonize the Jews. In fact, the reports can be considered authentic rather than products of fiction, since in most cases there are two different accounts, written separately by each of the missionaries, which corroborate the respective report, and there is also enough historical evidence to confirm large portions of the accounts independently. Most of all, they are extremely detailed, recording not only ‘successes’ in proselytizing Jews (which were fairly seldom), but also Jewish criticism and even hostility towards Christianity. A closer look at the reports therefore reveals the manifold forms of Jewish reactions to and interactions with the traveling ‘studiosi’.

In addition to the recorded conversations, the diaries contain numerous descriptions of the various Jewish communities, their living situation and communal structures. In that respect, they reveal precious information concerning Jewish settlements, especially in small towns and in the countryside (‘Landjuden’), on which we hardly have any substantial source material. But also their accounts of visits to the larger *kehillot* can shed some light on communal dynamics and tensions with the surrounding world.

The following first two documents recount two visits of the Pietist students to the town of Celle and the encounters they had with Isaac Wetzlar, author of the *mussar*-work ‘Libes briv’[^1], in 1732 (No. 1), as well as with his relatives and the rest of the local Jewry in 1733 (No. 2). The third document is a description of the second visit the missionaries paid to the Jewish community in Frankfurt (Main) in 1733 (No. 3), when after a previous visit, during which they had mainly talked to Jewish scholars, they wanted to concentrate on finding ‘inclined souls’ among the mass of the city Jews. This selection of documents should help create a basis for comparison between the religious attitudes of ‘normal’ Jews in big communities with strong rabbinical and secular leadership and those of Jews in smaller Jewries with no permanent presence of clerical authority.

Concentrating on the Jews of Celle as a representative case of Jewish attitudes towards non-Jews in many rural areas of Germany in the first half of the 18th century, I would highlight the remarkable openness they displayed vis-à-vis the missionaries. This openness stands in strong contrast to the reserved and sometimes even hostile attitudes recorded in many larger and more cohesive urban communities (such as Frankfurt). In my opinion, this kind of openness reveals fascinating information about the religious condition of such Jewries. On the one hand, the Jews of Celle were kind to the Christian strangers who were evidently trying to proselytize them, while on the other hand, they displayed a strong self-assurance and self-confidence in matters of faith throughout their conversations with the missionaries. Their openness can thus be regarded as an indication of strong religious stability and certitude. In addition, the Jews seem to have exchanged impressions amongst themselves on their interactions with the missionaries, keeping their community informed and unified. Jewish openness towards the Christian world is therefore not necessarily an indication of communal disintegration or religious decay, as has been suggested in previous research.

Finally, these findings need to be placed in relation with the grievances uttered in Isaak Wetzlar’s social criticism about the poor religious state of his “dear brothers and sisters in this [long enduring] exile”[^2]. Wetzlar, who was a prominent member of the Celle community and was familiar with the situation in many other Jewries due to his frequent business travels, expressed a very negative view on some of his contemporary coreligionists, a view which he enunciated in his ‘Libes briv’ as well as in his interaction with the missionary Widmann (document No. 1). To what degree was his critique also directed at the Jews from his hometown? I will argue that the behavior and the religious knowledge displayed by his fellow Jews could be perceived to some degree as a confirmation, but mostly as a contradiction of Wetzlar’s commentaries.

# Suggested reading:

On the Pietists’ mission to the Jews and the travel journals of the missionaries:

- BELTZ, WALTER: The Importance of Diaries in Methodological Discussions regarding Religious Studies (Germ.), in: Jewish History Quarterly (2006), No. 4, 496-503.
- BOCHINGER, CHRISTOPH: Dialogues Between Travelling Studiosi and Jews from Religious-Studies Perspective (Germ.), in: JHQ (2006), No. 4, 509-520.
- CLARK, CHRISTOPHER: The Politics of Conversion. Missionary Protestantism and the Jews in Prussia 1728–1941, Oxford 1995.
- ELYADA, AYA: A Goy Who Speaks Yiddish. Christians and the Jewish Language in Early Modern Germany, Stanford 2012.
- RYMATZKI, CHRISTOPH: Hallischer Pietismus und Judenmission. Johann Heinrich Callenbergs Institutum Judaicum und dessen Freundeskreis (1728-1736), Tübingen 2004.
- RYMATZKI, CHRISTOPH: The Theological Argumentation of the Institute's Writings for the Mission to the Jews and the Jewish Reactions to this (Germ.), in: JHQ (2006), No. 4, 615-626.
- VELTRI, GIUSEPPE: Callenberg Institute’s Diaries: Source Material for Studies of Jewish Culture of 1st Half of 18th Century? (Germ.), in: JHQ (2006), No. 4, 652-661.

On the ‘Libes briv,’ Isaac Wetzlar and the Jewish community of Celle:

- FAIERSTEIN, MORRIS: The Libes Briv of Isaac Wetzlar, Atlanta 1996.
- LINDEMANN, SILKE: Jüdisches Leben in Celle. Vom ausgehenden 17. Jahrhundert bis zur Emanzipationsgesetzgebung 1848, Bielefeld 2004.
- ROHRBACHER, STEFAN: Isaak Wetzlar in Celle. Ein jüdischer Reformer vor der Zeit der Aufklärung, in: Juden in Celle. Biographische Skizzen aus drei Jahrhunderten, (hg. v. der Stadt Celle), Celle 1996, 33-66.
- SILUK, AVRAHAM: Isaac Wetzlar's Pietist Surroundings. Some Reflections on Jewish– Christian Interaction and Exchange in 18th Century Germany, in: Transversal: Journal for Jewish Studies 13/1 (2015), 12-19.
- VOSS, REBEKKA: Love Your Fellow As Yourself: Early Haskalah Reform as Pietist Renewal, in: Transversal: Journal for Jewish Studies 13/1 (2015), 4–11.

## Source 1 Translation

1. An extract from the travelling journal of JOHANN GEORG WIDMANN on his journey to Northern Germany, 01.07.1732, Archives of the Francke Foundation in Halle (Saale), Main Archive (AFSt/H), K 55

**First Visit of Pietist Missionaries to the Town of Celle, September 1732**

**174r:** On the 16th [of September 1732] early in the morning, I arrived safe and sound in Celle. It was a market day which was suitable for many various conversations. I would like to report of one especially. Several Jews live outside the city gate, right next to the street, where I came from. Amongst them was particularly the Jew-home of Wetzlar! An old Jew was sitting in front of the door, and I started to talk with him in a Jewish manner [= in Yiddish]. He was taken by surprise by the unexpected salutation, and called the house mother, who immediately stepped outside and considered me at first to be a MESCHAMED[^3], and then ----, until I handed her a *Jewish-German Letter*[^4], and she assured, that such a letter must be from other hands. The woman recognized the letter immediately and said: A distinguished gentleman has given us, because my husband has often businesses with important persons, the same letter as a present and said: ‘A MESCHAMED has written it’. I: The matter is exactly the opposite. I can deliver you this information that these letters are being printed in Halle, in our BES MEDRAS [=school], and the MECHABER [=author] is a good Christian. Woman: My husband would very much like to see you. Please come at 2 o’clock in the afternoon. He would be at home then. I: I would like to give you *LEB BANIM*.[^5] The woman took it. I would like to give you a third tract, a *MEISE BUCH*.[^6] The woman accepted it also, so I gave her a fourth book, a *OR LES EREB*.[^7] She took them all, and repeated the invitation.  
I entered the house, as they were about to say the blessing, and I saw several Jews sitting at the table. The Jew Wetzlar welcomed me in a friendly manner. He lay the *Abrabanel* in front of himself and talked to the other Jews **[174v]** during the meal. His first story was the repetition of the account on how he received the *Jewish-German Letter*, only that he added this time, that he had been asked [by the person who gave him the letter (A.S.)] to give his judgement on the letter. He had considered the matter and reached the conclusion, that a MESCHAMED couldn’t have made it, because they [= converts (A.S.)] never speak well about Jews; a Jew couldn’t have made it either, because there are several things inside that wouldn’t befit Jews; therefore, the letter was made by a good friend of the Jews, who had done well to have written in such a manner. Now, back then, he wished he could have met the author and he still had the same desire to get acquainted with such a person. That is why he was glad I came to his house. I: There is not much love amongst the BENE ADAM [=human beings], they view and treat each other as if hatred, jealousy and persecution would be the best of virtues. Wetzlar: Such words I longed to hear for a long time. The world is poorer when one has no love. A righteous Jew cannot hate a Christian. [Only] a rude [Chunk], who never studied and wander about like cattle in the countryside, without SECHEL [=brain], he is like a Jew who understands nothing. But, a righteous Jew has to be grateful to the Christians a lot, because he has protection from them, and a Messiah has made a great deeds amongst you. If someone is a righteous Jew, though, he has [=must have] other thoughts. I: A Christian has also such MIZVOS [=commands], which commend the love towards all people, even against enemies, because they must not rest, but overcome the bad with the good. A Jew: There used to be a man here, Leyser, who was highly educated. He is dead now, and I am sorry that the others are not disposed as he was. I: Some are of the opinion that you, for example, don’t want CHELEK [=part] or GORAL [=fate] with the GOJIM [=non- Jews]. Against that, the Christians find such PSUKIM [=verses], which speaks differently **[175r]** of the days of the MASCHIACH. That means naturally that BENE ISRAEL should stay a GOI ECHAD [=one nation], Jes.31. As long as we cannot measure the sky above, it is EMES [=truth] that the JEHUDIM have virtues. A Jew: We are God’s first-born sons and we shall stay that. One can recognize it, because we are being kept so long and so wondrously [alive/as HIS people (A.S.)]. I: Yours is the childhood, the splendor [of] SCHECHINA [=God’s indwelling within his people], the TORAH, the BERIS [=covenant] [...] and the promise of MASCHIACH. These are your privileges, and even Paulus didn’t take them away! But it is yet to consider that in the days of MASCHIACH AMMIM RABBIM [=many nations] should become LEAM [=one people] for God. Neither humans nor cattle were allowed to go to HAR SINAI, otherwise they would have had to be stoned or shot to death; but AMMIM RABBIM should flow to the HAR [=mountain] of the MASCHIACH. Jew: The man speaks truly well.

Woman: Because of that I invited him to come. Having heard this, Wezler sat next to me, offered me something to eat and drink but I only thanked him for his politeness. Wezler tried again, meaning to honor me, but I apologized and lamented that on the roads, one hears so many explanations on the words of God that if one is to trust the PERUSCHIM [=interpretations], one doesn't know anymore what *Emes* or *SCHECKER* [=a lie] is. Wezler: I myself love *Abarbanel* and search my *PERES* [=interpretation] in him.

I: He is one of the kindest and best of rabbis but I am reluctant to follow anything, which is not clear and obvious from God’s holy word; the PERUSCHIM do not serve as a solid ground.

Wezler: I have read your books, your Catechism[^8], I have read the Catholic books. They talk a lot about the nature of PESILIM [=idol]. I also drink a glass of wine with a Lutheran, if you will offer me the best proof ------. I have come to learn that they believe only in one God, the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

I: We can talk as much as we want. In the end, it all means that all flows in just one godly being. Wezler: I have talked to you much **[175v]**, but I will not accept it, when one makes another God besides the Only God. He is so unified that his unity has no match. I: We also consider this unity so strong, that not even the slightest addition could be accepted. Wezlar: The ADONAI ZIDKENU [=God is our justice] is the leading aspect in Jeremiah; I once told a superintendent here that Jerusalem was called ADONAI SCHAMMAH [God heard], that ARON BERIS [=ark of the covenant] was called ADONAI. He said from the pulpit that someone had given him the light, but afterwards I have found out that he was only flattering. I: This is the most important thing: nobody can ask for SCHEM CHAVUI [=hidden name] of God; he wants to be recognized and no one can deny that HAMISBEACH [=sacrificial altar], ARON BERIS, JERUSCHALAIM bear God's name because God had lay his name himself in peace; nobody believes in a second or third God. Wezler: I know you only believe in one God. I: We also have the SCHMA[?] Marcus 12. Our MASCHIACH did not make himself into any God, that is why we should understand what is written in misch.(!) ch. 8, of the CHOCHMAH [=wisdom], which was there before the beginning, before the days of eternity, and that we also understand what Mich. ch. 5 tells about an origin at the very beginning, before the days of eternity, and what was the DEAH [=opinion] of the KEDOSCHIM [=saints]– Prov. 30 v. 3,4,5. Wezler: The answer to this has already been given. I: The answer is here and there, but we believe that a Messiah, meaning just DAM and BASER, cannot offer GULA [= redemption]. Only God himself shall be the GOEL [=redeemer] – Es. 54. He calls himself MELECH [=king] and we find such PSUCKIM as in Es. 60 v. 1, 2, in *KUMI URI* [= come, awake] that Jehovah appears when MASCHIACH appears. How can that be?

**[176r]** Wezler: I have read in the Catechism that Messiah had suffered. I have read that the Father is eternal, the Son is eternal, the Holy Spirit is eternal but there are no three eternals but only one Eternal God. I have read that God has taken upon himself to suffer. But he only suffered in the [earthly] time; how can the Son be as the Father since the suffering was in time, in which the Father did not suffer and yet one should be the same as the other. I: You will not find answers this way; the MASCHIACH was killed as a being of BASER and DAM, but he was brought to life again in his spirit, by the divinity at his side, and was given the strength to arise from the dead. If all the world's BESER and DAM [=flesh and blood] came together, no CIPPURET [= atonement] or ZEDEK OLAMIM [=eternal justice] would have any effects. However, it is said in Es. 43 that the BRIS burdened God with our sins and so we must understand from this that the weight and the burden come from God. Jew: How can it be, though, that he suffers and [the other] one doesn't suffer, if they are one? I: They are not one in sufferings because a deity could not suffer; that is a misunderstanding. When Israel rebelled against the SCHECHINAH in the MIDBAR [=desert] and complained, and angered the RUACH HAKODESCH [=Holy Spirit], it is said that the Israelis rebelled against God. The TORAH mentions a MALACH [=angel] – Es. 23 – and still it is written that they argued with the MALACH. Thus, God makes things into his own. Wezler: I am happy to talk about anything but not about God being AB, BEN and RUACH. I: You don't understand the matter completely because in the EMUNAH NOZERIM [=Christian belief] one is not baptised BESCHEMOS [= in the names of, pl.] but BASCHEM [= in the name of, sg.] AB, BEN and RUACH HAKODESCH. What NOZERIM understand differently by AB BEN VERUACH is PANIM, in German “persons“; PANIN(!) appear in your books. Jew: Where? I: In the 13 articles of faith where it iswritten:BESCHUMPANIM[=undernocircumstances]. Wezler:Ifonewishes to talk of figures, then he would be a JACHID [=singular]. I: PANIM is not explained or defined by figures or shapes, those are not in God, everything is RUCHIOS. If one explained RUACH HAKODESCH **[176V]**, SCHECHINAH, MIMRA DI ADONAI and METATRON well, you could see everything in the same light.

Jew: I would like to know more about this. I shall keep believing in the one living God. I: That is right; one would reject it [=the belief in one Got (A.S.)] only then, if ELOCHIM ACHERIM [=different gods] would be preached; that is the true AVODAH SARAH [=idolatry]. Wezler: I hold a very high opinion of this book, ‫ספר חוכת הלבנה‬‎,[^9] which teaches the Schaar [=gate] to recognize the JACHID; the SCHAAR will be opened so that God will be recognized from the Book of Genesis, followed by the SCHAAR of AVODAH [=work/service], [to teach (A.S.)] that we are bound to serve God. Afterwards comes the SCHAAR of our sins, the SCHAAR of humiliation, the SCHAAR of TSCHUBE [=repentance], and the SCHAAR of the AHOLOT [?]. This SEPHER was written by Rabbi Bechai bar Joseph, and was translated into the German-Jewish vernacular in Amsterdam. I have bought it three times for my children. Whoever lives so [=according to this book (A.S)] will stay in the right [path (A.S.)] I: This is the SCHAAR Torah, but how do we get to the point, where we can enter the SCHAAR of the utter love, without any AVERO [=sins]. And, because no BEN ADAM is without JEZER HARO[^10][=the evil inclination] and his own sin, where stands the gate of CIPPORAH [=atonement]. Wezler: I cry out to God, and speak: You are an EL RACHUM [=a merciful God], You know that I cannot help myself, I am your creation, You have made me, therefore is my hope solely with You. Thus, I seak God’s mercy. I: That is a good beginning. If God demands faith and faith requires to keep God’s word, commitment, plight and promise, even if reason cannot conceive it; how can we reach then the truth.

Wezler: Yes, we must reach the state of bliss through our belief. I: If we can achieve bliss through our faith, the way it is written, ZADIK BAEMUNATO JCHJEH [=the righteous shell live in his faith]; which is the word of faith? I have found it in Es. 50: ‘through his recognition, he will be my servant’; the righteous will do a lot of justice.

In that manner, I explained what Christians believe. Wezler asked about my name **(177r)** and then wrote it down on the table. He thanked me for the books I had given him and said: his love for Christians originated in this word, because He (Jesus) had left us such a great work. I compare this Wezler to Hirsch Kaiser[^11] although he is a younger. He doesn't think too highly of Jews but will swear that no good Jew will scorn true Christians and that the work, if explained clearly, pleased him well. He admitted that he is exactly like the AM RAZIM[?], no unyielding Jew. He recognized that the Evangelists were better, but lamented that one cannot find many LAMDANIM [=scholars] who can truly speak to Jews with the SCHORESCH [=root]. I promised him that, with Gods help, more and more ideas of Christianity will be explained with clarity to the Jews. So much as to that. [May] God, who has awoken this heart to search for the truth, will make others follow, so that they would walk with God, as if they were redeemed from blindness and thus could reach the True Light.

## Source 2 Translation

2. An extract from the travelling journal of JOHANN ANDREAS MANITIUS on his journey to the Harz Mountain Region, Franconia, Hesse and Northern Germany, 01.01.1733, AFSt/H, K 57

**Second Visit of the Pietist Missionaries to the Town of Celle, September 1733**

**[144r]** Dec. 2nd: ... We arrived at Celle ... The Jews of this town lives in the outskirts. There are approx. 10 to 12 families, some are rich especially Wetzlar, which is also said to be the most educated.

Dec. 3rd: we went together to his [Wetzlar’s] house, because my companion decided to talk to him this time, especially after the honorable Mrs. Münchhausen recommended him to us [...].[^12]Unfortunately, he was away, but his son stood at the door and was friendly towards us. He said, that he [Wetzlar] would return home tomorrow. He still has the three books my companion had given him. They were locked in a cabinet, in order to be kept in good shape. My companion showed him YOREH DEAH[^13] and the Jewish-Letter[^14], and asked him to deliver them to his father. Wetzlar’s son apologized, and said he didn’t know if he was allowed to accept them. My companion then handed them to another Jew who arrived at the scene. **[144v]** The CHASSAN also came along, and wanted to know, what kind of books we were carrying. He looked at them and was surprised to see, that Yoreh Deah was translated into German. They believed it was a part out of their Talmud. My companion had removed the introduction from one of the copies, as he [later] explained to me.[^15] In the meantime, other Jews gathered around us, and we distributed several books amongst them. One of the inhabitants in Wetzlar’s home received the Epist. to the Romans[^16] and another letter. Two others got each a YOREH DEAH and a Jewish Letter. Besides that I gave a woman a Letter. God, let it become a blessing amongst them!

The Jews here were more affable than in Hanover. They let you talk to them and took the books for an examination and kept them. We were not able to engage in a lengthy conversation because they all had work to do, so we started heading out. On our way to the inn, where we wanted to have our breakfast, we’ve noticed a man and a woman observing us from a window across the street. This motivated us to go over there after we finished our breakfast. The man wanted to speak to us at the door, but the woman asked us if we would like to come in for a while. Soon enough, my companion handed over the Letter. The man looked at it and said: I can see now, your whole matter is to proof, that MESCHIACH already arrived and you would then explain that the 53rd Chapter of Isaiah speaks of him. Using chapter 52, my companion showed him, that it must have referred to the messiah. But the Jew could hardly wait [for the entire explanation (A.S.)], and he said he wanted to ask him something. He had asked this question many pastors, but no one could explain it to him in a way he could understand and accept. HINNE ANI SCHOLEICH LOCHEM ES ELIHU HANOBI LIPHNE 60 JOM ADANNOI [=AD HAJOM(?)] HAGADUL VEHANAUROH[^17] [=]. My companion responded out of Ies. (?) 11, where the horrible day to come down upon Jerusalem is also mentioned. He combined the two verses, and reached the following conclusion: because the JOM HAGADUL VEHANAUROH had already been bestowed upon Jerusalem and destroyed it, and, in addition, the land was hit by a CHEREM, now must follow **[145r]** also the other part of the prophecy. The Jew was not convinced yet, but he also didn’t have any time left, so we’ve agreed to return at 5pm.

My companion gave him the YOREH DEAH and he kept it together with the Letter. The woman told us, that she has already heard of my companion a year ago. The Jew Meyer and his wife had been living at the inn ‘Zum Weißen Roß’ when he stayed there, and they told her that they had great HANOAH [=delight], and pleasure listening to him, because he speaks such good Hebrew. This was probably the main reason for these people to want to talk to us.

...

**[145v]** ... we went to the Jew in the town’s outskirts. The Jew had left the house, so we sat down with the wife and their little children. After she received us in a friendly manner, the woman took the opportunity to speak. She repeated what she heard about my companion at the inn ‘Zum Weißen Roß’ the previous year. The Jew Meyer, his wife and other Jews all testified that they had a great HANAE [=delight] from his speech. She recounted also that the rabbi in Hanover fasted each and every day of the year, and that he never eats before the evening and even then he only eats a herring. My companion replied that this cannot be called fasting. There are many amongst us, who also eat only once every 24 hours. Fasting is only [good] if it is being utilized, so that one could fast in his soul, or to direct his heart to God and the godly matters. **[146r]** She asked us, if we were not married and then congratulated us for being blissful, because we had more time to [invest] in God’s word, and not to [waste] it with raising children. She was also told, what the main purpose of our journey was, because she wanted to know, why we didn’t become preachers? It was something that many Jews throughout the land asked us.

Finally, my companion showed her clearly, why the Jews’ prayers must be unpleasant and dissatisfying to God, which is also the reason why their prayers are not being answered. This affected her, and a blessed scruple awoke in her.

Finally, the man arrived, but stayed hidden on the side in order to avoid the discussion. But, since he noticed, that we weren’t going to leave, he came inside, took the Letter and the YOREH DEAH and said, he had read it, and recognized, that it was written against them. My companion ---- ----, if he wanted to say, it was a lie. Jew: No, he didn’t mean to say it so uncouthly. He is just saying that it is written against the Jews. We would explain that chapter 53 talks of the MESCHIACH, he knew that already, but you cannot do that. My companion translated to him Zach[arias] 111, Dan[iel] 9 and the previous chapter, No. 52, in order to show him that it necessarily meant the messiah. I found it very appeasing, that this Jew expressed his doubts or points of disagreement so courteous, using always the phrase: he cannot grasp, and then, for example: that we are redeemed through the blood of the MESCHIACH, or that he is supposed to be the king of the world, because he was not published in front of the whole world.[^18] After that had been explained, [he still argued] that there are still so many nations who haven’t recognized him. After answering all his questions, my companion reached the subject of Elia from the morning, and elucidated the matter to him, using mainly the comparison between the state of Elia and that of the mystery.

After he heard all of that, he kept the Letter and the YOREH DEAH, and one could sense that he had the desire to keep searching for the truth. I wish him divine blessing for that. Otherwise, [I can recount that (A.S.)] he is the Jew responsible for the distribution of the alms (a GABBE). I never learned his name. He wore black clothes and seemed poor. The next time we’ll travel through this region, he will be our first visit.

...

**[146v]** Dec. 4th. This morning we went together and looked for other opportunities to conduct conversations with some Jews, but we couldn’t find anyone. We went to see Wetzlar, who had returned home, but he was getting a shave when we got to him. He sent his wife to apologize on his behalf, for he didn’t have any time available. He had just come back, and when his beard is shaven, he would have to leave immediately. We therefor went on, and were content with ourselves for the time being, because we used this good occasion to hand him some new books.

Since we didn’t see anyone else, we went back to the house, where we have been the day before, but the Jew was not home. We took our leave from the woman and because the weather was good, took off at noon and left Celle behind.

++*The other missionary added his own impression from this (his second) visit to Celle*[^19]++

The Jew Wetzlar had come home the night before. I went to the door of his study with my companion, but he was just getting his beard shaved. He apologized because he had to work all day. He hoped we would not think ill of him for that. I noticed from all these things that this Jew who had taken a book in his home, together with others has already reported everything [to him = Wetzlar]. Wezlar [in the previous encounter with Widmann (A.S.)] has reached the point, where we talked about Christ’s godliness, and I was prepared to give him numerous proofs on that. But since “YOREH DEAH“ also talks about that, he will be able to reflect on this question using it. One needs to eliminate and to tear down many Jewish strongholds, until one can start laying the ground [for conversion (A.S.)] and bring the Jews onto the right path. The ones in Celle are easier to talk to than others. This comes as a result from their belief, that they can win the arguments with gentility and flattery. But one should try harder with Wezlar, because his folks still prove themselves affectionate and friendly.

## Source 3 Translation

3. The Diary of JOHANN ANDREAS MANITIUS about his journey to the Harz district, Franconia, Hesse and Northern Germany starting 1/1/1773, AFSt/H, K 57

**The Missionaries' impressions on their second visit to Frankfurt am Main:**

**[62v]** *In a conversation with a Mr. Gentzel in Frankfurt am Main:*

We ... learned ... partly about the situation with the local Jewry; He was able to provide some strange and remarkable information, on the one hand about his own occasional conversations with some who were happy to listen to him, on the other hand about the conversations of others, particularly Hochmann von Hochenau[^20], who has publicly preached to them in their school here. Also, he mentioned a book in his possession, an octavo printed in German and Hebrew by one BOOCK in Leipzig in 1720, wherein the Christian teachings from Jewish Books were rendered to them in their own words; he recounted that when he gave this book to the Jew, the latter kissed it and eagerly took it with him to read it, yet returned after a while and eventually said in distress that he had been subjected to HEREM because of the book. The same harsh procedure is apparently still being applied nowadays. ...

**63v** [...] *The Frankfurt Jews' show lack of interest in the studiosi:*

On October 3rd, we both went out, and since it was Shabbat, we walked straight through the Jews' Lane. At their school, we saw a familiar Jew who had previously been present during my companion's conversation with Anschel Worms and who affably greeted us in the forecourt of the school. My companion said we had returned to see how they would celebrate their SCHABBAS BERESCHIS (the time they start reading the first Book of Moses at their school again) and asked whether they had attained a GOULLE [=redemption] in the meantime. Yet his only reply to this was that Anschel Worms was at home at the moment and that we would find him there if we wished to speak to him. This, however, was not our intention; for the time being, we were planning to make a general assessment of their outer state, as well as show ourselves in public, so that anyone with a secret desire to speak to us could be on the lookout for us, knowing we had returned. We then left and walked all the way down the lane until we passed the general Jews' kitchen and then out on the narrow lane. **[64r]** Afterwards, we went and stood on the great bridge over the Main, where I had spoken to several folks the year before, but it was only a yet unwed Jew and his fellow who came to us. We were just reading BERESCHIS [=Genesis] 5/5 and my companion repeated our discourse about the ‫כתנות עור‬‎ cosnaus aur, a term hereafter used for priestly garments; he was showing how God had taught the ADAM priestly garments and the way to reconcile with God. He thereupon gave him the Gospel according to Luke, asking him to return it, as he would find him here on the bridge from time to time. He [the Jew] listened to the exposition without objection, eagerly took the book and perused it on the bridge. We have not gotten it back to this day, the 7th of the month, as I am writing this. [...]

*An attempt to purposely bypass people of learning and to reach ‘sympathetic’ or ‘inclined’ souls:*

**64v** As we were heading into Frankfurt, my companion said that this time he had no great desire to dispute with the men of learning. He instead wished to have good occasion to become acquainted with the hidden souls whom God had already secretly selected and prepared, as it were, since he was hoping to achieve more with them than with the former, who kept him from performing the actual Blessed Work with all their talk. ...

*Conversation with the merchant's widow* Alleinsinn *who was supposed to help the studiosi in their quest for the 'hidden souls':*

... after my companion had indicated the final objective[^21] of our visit, she spoke of a Jewess named Simla, who had a strong desire for Christ, yet had difficulty believing in the principle of the Holy Trinity. However, she led a proper life and performed many deeds of love... **(65r)** ... she said that the Jewess Simla (a widow who did not live on the Jews' Lane, but amongst the Christians, yet had wicked offspring who would immediately denounce her if one were to go to her and address matters of faith) [had] fallen into poverty. Her friend had heard of this and had brought her things to help her out of her hardship. [...] She further recounted that the Jewess had often visited Mr. D. Dusedang in Offenbach, who knew her and several other devout Jews. She was also familiar with the Jew Gerson, who did not reveal any inclination towards the Christian religion, yet was a judicious Jew who was happy to discuss matters of faith with Christians. He had been put under pressure several times, which made him tame, she said. [...]

*Conversation with the separatist[^22] D. Dusedang in Offenbach*

**(65v)** [...] C.d. October 5th. We went to Offenbach [...] in order to further ascertain the presence of hidden good souls amongst the Jews in this place which is only one hour away from Frankfurt. Upon our arrival at his house, after a cordial reception, we disclosed this our wish to him, and he spoke of a Jewess with an inclination towards Christianity, saying she often came to visit him and had even joined him at the (separatists') gathering several times. He did not mention her name, but it was probably Simla. He did not wish to acquaint us with any of the local Jews, but said there were righteous souls amongst them as well. He spoke of one man, now deceased, who would spend no more than three kreutzers a day along with his wife and had done his utmost to steadfastly abide by God's law as best he could. He had done many good deeds amongst the needy Jews as well as the Christians, and whenever he saw a poor man, he would call for him and lend him money. When the man wanted to return it, he would say: Keep it, you might need it more than I do. He eventually acknowledged on his deathbed that God was a very holy God indeed, and His law was of such perfection that it was impossible for any mortal to abide by it.[^23] [...]



&nbsp;

**(67r)** *October 7th was a rainy day, and the studiosi could not leave their lodgings until the afternoon; they split up, one of them went on the bridge and the other one into town. Manitius, who went to the bridge, found* no opportunity for me this time. I went down to the water, where several Jews were getting on the ship, but I was unable to achieve anything there. I eventually went into town and there I saw my companion standing in the middle of the street and talking to 6 to 8 Jews. I went past, thinking God would provide me with an opportunity as well, and indeed there was a Jew who was just heading off because he lived in a village an hour away from here. I asked him whether he had earned much that day and whether he still had desire to trade. He inquired whether I had anything to offer, and I said yes, if it suited him. When I showed him the booklet, he said, oh, that is one of the new books! and walked away. I continued on and encountered a familiar rabbi from ++Friedberg++ whom I had previously conversed with here on the bridge as well as in Darmstadt. We instantly recognized each other and greeted each other cordially, and I asked: How have you been? **[67v]**



++Jew++: All is well, thank God. I praise God above all, whatever my state, as we owe praises to our Lord for the bad as well as the good. He then told me that he was planning to marry off his daughter and that his lottery was about to be drawn. I eventually asked him whether he had read one of the booklets I had brought to Friedberg, and he said: ++Oh yes, but!++ He said nothing more, and I said I had a new book now which I would recommend him to peruse carefully. Yet his manner suggested such indifference that I said nothing further than: I am well aware that some are so full of desire for DIBRE AULOM HASSEH [=things of this world] that they are unable to think of OLAM HABBO [=afterlife]. This is how I took my leave, yet he noticed that I had reprimanded him thus and said: No, OLAM HABBO has to be considered above everything else. So pious and holy were the words this wayward, stubborn Jew could utter, and yet he maintained his proud convictions! [...]

October 8th: **[68r]** [...] In the afternoon, I went out on the bridge to speak to Jews. After I had waited for quite a while, a wild young fellow approached me, wishing to do some trading. I told him that I had something to offer, but that I already knew in advance it would not suit him. When I showed him a booklet, he leapt some 8 paces away from me, as though I had wanted to do him harm. Standing thus far away from me, he said I was a MESCHUMED [=convert]. An older Jew, a musician living in Offenbach, joined us and said, no, he does not look like a MESCHUMED to me. I said: Look how the poor man **[68v]** flees the good booklet; this is how one reacts when tries to talk to him of DIBRE AULOM HABBO. No, said the other one, the musician, that is the fear talking, since we are in GOLUS [=exile/diaspora] and the man knows we have to be wary. I thereupon testified that he should not think I would go about it like Eisenmenger[^24], I was trying to change everything for the better and it was out of love for the JEHUDIM that I spoke to them. Since he then boasted about being well-traveled, having read the Bible and knowing the difference between all the religions, I asked him to tell me about CHADDESCH EMUNAH [=religious renewal][^25], as I wanted to ascertain whether he really had knowledge of it. He was reluctant to speak, but I eventually prompted him to say: You believe that your Messiah was the real Messiah and that he will return magnificent and glorious. Now, if he does return and manifest as what you say he is, we will also believe it. You believe him to have been a great NOBI [=prophet], yet how come he is ELOHAI TOPHLE EMUNEH [=God of the (nonbelievers?)] but makes himself PSILIM [=false gods]? I said: It is true that you can soon overcome TOPHLE EMUNEH and throw them out with God's Word, but I am keen to see how you can overcome CHADDESCH EMUNEH; that should prove a little more difficult, since they stand too firmly in God's Word. He said we should not be speaking there and suggested I should go to Amsterdam, where I would be informed presently. I testified that one could speak to me in confidence and I would make sure no harm would come of it to the Jews, yet he excused himself, saying this was not appropriate in the street (we had almost walked all the way through Sachsenhausen and the vineyards). He told me he would prefer if I came to talk to him in Offenbach and mentioned his name was Joseph Geiger. He praised many things about D. Dusedang, of whom I have already mentioned something above, as much as is necessary. [...]

**[69r]** On ++October 9th++ I went out before noon, looking for opportunities to speak to Jews, and encountered one from ++Pergel++, which is situated close to this place. When I showed him the Jewish-German Letter, he wanted to buy it off me for 1 kreutzer, but I sold him the ++JOREH DEAH[^26]++ for it and gave him the Letter as a gift. He quickly hurried away, but I managed to tell him that he would be able to extract a lot of CHOCHMA [=wisdom] from the booklet if he would LEINEN [=learn] it with KWONE [=intention]. He asked whether I was a book peddler.

++I++: No, I carry these books with me as a traveling student, and wherever I find a good man, I present one to him, the way I did with many copies in Hesse. He asked whether I had been there in the lane. (Meaning the Jews' Lane, which is simply called "the Lane" [in Greek (A.S.)]). ++I++: Yes, I have been there, but I do not trade in books. ++He++: But it does not say where it has been printed. I: It is a quick read if you apply yourself to it, and the booklet particularly shows how the MASCHICHIIM [=Christians][^27], who think so highly of the MESCHIACH, can provide clear proof from THAURE NEBIIM and KSUBIM. Thereupon we parted. [...]

++October 10th++ ... **[73r] [**...] my companion went to the Jews' Lane and I went home, because he preferred to go on his own. I, however, did not have the heart to go this time, may God forgive me if I have thus sinned against Him. My heart was fully shuttered, as I had noticed **[73v]** that the folk here have grown very unyielding. Yesterday, on AREF [=evening] SCHABBAS, I approached an old man, but we got no further in the conversation than discuss that some Jews thought more highly of the ESREVARBE [=24 (books of the Old Testament] and others of the GOMOREHE [=gemara] and TALMUD, and he confessed that he abode by the ESREVARBE. He quickly took leave from me because he noticed I wanted to speak of good things to him, which caused me pain. May God have mercy on this poor folk and open up their hardened hearts, so that the healing waters of the sweet Gospel can flow into them. [...]

**[74r]**: October 11th [...] We arrived in ++Offenbach++ at midday, and upon entering the town encountered an old Jew on the street who informed us that up to 80 families lived there and that the RAAF [=rabbi] of this KEHÜLLE [=community] was in ++Friedberg++, but there was a learned BIMKUM [=substitute] or VICE-RAAF in town. When two Baumeister[^28], or Jewish judges, walked past, he informed us that they were settling litigations that day, since they had nothing else to do, and that the BIMKUM ought to be present there at 1 o'clock as well. [...]

Hardly had we gotten up and started walking down the street, when a Baumeister followed us rather stormily. My companion approached him, and he obliged, since he had wanted to speak to us anyway. **[76r]** He immediately asked whether we were selling books. We said, not today, for it is SCHABBAS.

Jew: Could it be that we had distributed some? ++My companion++: We only give a book away when we come across a judicious, devout man who can use it properly and read it. No books have been distributed to the common folk. As he wished to look at one, my companion showed him the ++JOREH DEAH++, but he returned it straight away and uttered the following bold words: ++Were it not Sunday, I would take you to the magistrate,++ and again he said ++he would take us to the magistrate if we remained there until the evening++. My companion said we had no reason to fear that and might as well be the first ones, since we knew very well what we were doing. He added that since we always bore God and the authorities in mind on our travels, we would be able to answer for everything. As Jewish men, women and children gathered around us during the conversation with this man and wanted to jeer us, my companion made it even clearer that we had no reason to fear the authorities, saying: If you wish to continue this way, we shall go to the magistrate and have you arrested. Be warned and make sure you treat traveling students (he expected us to be treated like baptized Jews) properly, so you do not get into trouble. We do not wish to get you into trouble, but you must give travelers the politeness and respect that they give to you, and have we not treated you in a friendly way? You are aware that we went to see the rabbi. We have not caused harm to anyone here, and you have no reason to fear that we will afflict any damage to you, the way it happened 25 years ago, when your school was closed down until you paid a hefty fine. Upon hearing these words, the Baumeister became fearful, entreating us to pay no mind to the ignorant women **[76v]** and to take no offense at what he had said. He apologized that they had be cautious, because they have been warned once before not to get into trouble again. This satisfied both us and him, so we wished each other SCHALOM and parted. I found my companion's threat to have the Jews arrested somewhat harsh, since I believe that a Christian should rather suffer, as long as the reason is his intention to warn the Jew and keep him from getting himself into trouble, as well as the intention to avoid complicated circumstances. Nevertheless, I approve of it and find it is a sensible way to proceed.

We therefore would have had nothing to fear and would have been able to visit Mr. D. Dusedang, but my companion considered it best to spare him this time, so that he should not have anything to answer for on our account, seeing as the authorities did not particularly favor him ... We thus went straight out of town and left this poor Jewry to the merciful love of God. Oh, how wretched and woebegone are people who, prompted by the evil foe, become so hardened and unyielding and wrongfully reject the precious truth. The rabbi had declared, among other things, that he who had a book ++would be called out++ in school in the evening and would have to turn it in. When my companion encountered him on the bridge in town the day after, he therefore asked him whether the book had been called out. Yet he refused to admit to anything and said that nothing could be called out since nothing had been handed out. [...]

**(77v)** ... *(during a conversation with a local Christian scholar, the latter explains why he thinks their message fails to reach the Jews)*

He claimed the great obstacle on the Jews' side was that they had completely and utterly forbidden anyone amongst them to show any inclination towards Christians and their books. This is what kept most of them from really reflecting on the truth...

**78v:** When the blessed Spener[^29] was banned by the local magistrate from delivering his teachings on the Jews' Lane, I was told this could not have happened EX THEOLOGICIS RATIONIBUS, but EX POLITICIS, which he quoted in one of his Theologische Bedenken. [...]

**[79r]** ++October 13th [1733]++ ... *[Conclusions on the Frankfurt Jews]*

We thus left Frankfurt am Main after approaching as many hidden good souls as we could and having the necessary books **secretly** delivered to them. We also publ[icaly] encountered them, I outside the Lane and my companion also on the Lane. We also had occasion to spread a small number of books amongst them and have some conversations, but lastly the Frankfurt Jews have proven to be steadfast and zealous in their superstition and have probably put a strict ban on our books. Since they are so devoted to trade here and fear the rabbis' ban more than God, we have little access, but we hope that God will therefore grant us even better access in other places.

## Source 1 Original Text

1. Auszug aus: Tagebuch von JOHANN GEORG WIDMANN über seine Reise nach Norddeutschland, 01.07.1732, Archiv der Francksche Stiftung/Hauptarchiv (AFSt/H), K 55

**Erster Besuch des Missionars Widmann in Celle, September 1732:**

**174r:** Den 16ten [September 1732 (A.S.)] früh morgens glucklich in Zell, auff einen Marcktag ankome, welche auch zu allerhand und verschiedene gesprächen gebrauchen können. Ich will sonderlich eines erzehlen. Außer dem Stattthor wohnen etliche Juden, neben der Straße welche hereingekommen, unter denselben kome sonderlich in das Wezlarische Juden-Hauß! Ein alter Jud saße vor der Thur, mit diesem fieng an auff jüdische manier zu reden, er wunderte sich solcher unvermutheten [A]nreden, und ruffte der Haußmutter, welche ungefär mit heraußgetreten, und mich gehalten anfänglich vor einen MESCHAMED[^30] [=Konvertit], so dann vor ---emen her, biß einen **Jüdisch teutschen brieff**[^31]**** ihr in die hande gegeben, und sie versichert daß solcher brieff ganz aus andern händen käme, die Frau hat den brieff sogleich erkant und gesagt: Ein furnehmer Herr allhier, dann mein Mann hat mit großen Leuten zu thun, hat diesen brieff uns gegeben als ein praesent und gesagt: Ein MESCHAMED habe ihn gemacht. Ich: die sache halt sich ganu anderst, die nechste nachricht kann ich euch geben die brieffe werden in Halle auff unserm BES MEDRAS [=Schule]gedruckt und istder MECHABER [=Autor] ein guter Christ. Frau: Mein Mann werd euch gerne wollen sehen, kommet nachmittag um 2 Uhr, da ist er zu Hause. Ich: Ich will euch geben ein ***LEB BANIM**.[^32]* Die Frau nahm solches an. Ich will euch geben das dritte Stück, ein ***MEISE BUCH***.[^33] Die Frau nahm es auch an. Also gab ihr das 4.te ein ***OR LES EREB[^34]***. Sie nahm auch alle zusamen und batt mich noch einmahl nachmittag zu kommen um 2. Uhr. Wie sie BENSCHEN [=Segen sagen (über die Mahlzeit)] wolten, so kam herein, und fand etliche Juden an den disch sizen, der Jud Wetzlar empfienge mich, und nahm mich freundlich auff, den Abrabanel aber hatte er vor sich gelegt, und mag wehrend der **[174v]** mahlzeit mit den andern Juden gesprochen haben. Seine erste erzehlung war eine widerhohlung von dem empfang deß jüdisch teutschen Brieff mit diesem Zusatz, daß man von ihme ein urtheil darüber verlanget, was er davon halte. Er habe sich darauff bedacht und geo-fert(?) daß ein MESCHAMED solchen nicht gemacht, weil sie so guth von Juden nicht reden, ein Jud habe solchen auch nicht gemacht, Weil darinen verschiedene sachen vorkommen, so den Juden nicht zu kommen, darum solchen Brieff eine gemachet, welcher ein guter freund von Juden seye, den auch recht wohl gethan, daß er auff solche weise geschriben. Nun hab er damahls gewunschet, er möchte den menschen gern sehen, und habe auch noch verlangen solchen kennen zu lernen. Es wäre ihm darum sehr lieb, daß in sein Haus gekommen. Ich: Es ist nicht viel liebe unter den BENE ADAM [=Menschen], sie sehen einander an, alß wann haß, neid und Verfolgung die beste tugenden wären. Jud Wezlar: Das hatte ich schon lange gern gehört. Daran fehlet es, daß man keine liebe hat, ein rechter Jud kann einen Christen nicht haßen, ein grober Gloz(?), der nichts gelernet hat auff dem Land herum lauffet wie ein Vich, ohne *SECHEL* [=Verstand], der ist dem Jud, er verstehet nichts. Aber ein rechter Jud hat den Christen viel zu dancken, sie haben schutz von ihnen, und einer Messias hat ein großes Werck unter Euch gethan. Wer ein rechter Jude ist, oder hat ganz ander gedancken.

Ich: Ein Christ hat auch solche MIZVOS [=Gebote], welche die liebe gegen alle menschen gebieten, und solten es auch feinde seyn, dann sie sollen keine ruhe üben, sonder das böse mit gutem überwinden. Jud: Ein Man war hier, Leyser(?), der war hochstudiert, solcher ist gestorben, es ist mir leyd darfür, die andern sind nicht so gesinnet. Ich: Man ist der meinung, daß ihr, zum exempel, in euren gebettern kein CHELECK [=Anteil] oder GORAL [=Schicksal] mit GOJIM [=nicht-Juden] haben wolt, dahingegen finden die Christen solche *PSUKIM* [=Bibelverse], welche anderst reden von **[175r]** den tagen daß MASCHIACHS [=Messias]. Das ist gewiß, daß die BENE ISRAEL [=das Volk Israel] sollen bleiben ein GOI ECHAD [=ein Volk] Jes. 31. so lang man den Himel oben nicht meßen kann, es ist auch *EMES* [=Wahrheit], daß die JEHUDIM [=Juden] Vorzüge haben. Jud: Wir sind Gottes erstgebohrner Sohn und bleiben es auch, welches nur daran zu erkennen, daß wir so lange Zeit und so wunderlich erhalten werden. Ich: Euer ist die Kindschaft, die Herrlichkeit SCHECHINAH [=Einwohnung Gottes im Volk], die TORAH der BERIS [=Bund], der a----h, und die verheißung von maschiach. Das sind eure Vorrehte, die hat auch Paulus nicht benomen! Aber es ist doch bedencklich, daß in der tagen des MASCHIACH AMMIM RABBIM [=viele Völkler] sind Gott LEAM [=zu einem Volk]. Zum HAR SINAI [=Berg Sinai] durfften weder menschen noch Vieh gehen, oder sie müßten gesteiniget, oder mit einem geschoß erschoßen werden, aber zum HAR [=Berg] des MASCHIACHS fließen AMMIM RABBIM [=viele Völker]. Jud: Der Mann redet Warhafftig guth. Frau: Ich hab ihn darum laßen kommen.

Hierauff setzte sich Wezler näher zu mir, bott mir etwas an, was verlangen möchte, bedanckte mich aber vur die Hofflichkeit. Wezler hielt noch einmahl an, und war bedacht, mir eine ehre anzuthun, ich entschuldigte mich aber und klagte daß auff einen reisen sonderlich wahr genommen, so viele erklärungen des Wortes Gottes, wann man den PERUSCHIM [=Interpretationen] nach gehen wolte, so wüßte keines mehr, was *EMES* [=Wahrheit] oder *SCHECKER* [=Lüge] möchte seyn. Wezler: den *Abarbanel* liebe ich, meinen *PERES* [=Interpretation] suche in ihm. Ich: Er ist eine einer von den gelindisten, und besten Rabbiner, aber ich halte darvor was nicht in Gottes heiligem wort selbst klar und deutlich zu finden, ohne die PERUSCHIM [=Interpretationen] das beruhe auff einem ungewisen grund. Wezler: Ich habe gelesen Eure bücher, euren *catechismus*,[^35] ich habe gelesen der Catholischen Bücher, da stehet viel vom wesen der PESILIM [=Unreinen], ich trincke auch mit einem Lutherischen noch ein Glas wein, wie sie mir dann werden das Zeugnis geben, daß der beste werde seyn worin(?) ich habe gefunden, daß sie nur einen Gott glauben, und den Gott Abrahams, Isaacs, und Jacobs. Ich: Man mag reden so viel man viel, so fleiset alles ein in ein einiges gottliches unzertrennliches wesen.

Wetzler: Ich hab viel mit ihnen geredet **[175v]** aber davon rede nicht, wann man außer dem Einigen Gott noch ein Gott machet, dann er ist so einig, daß seine Einigkeit ihres gleiche nicht hat. Ich: Wir sehen auch so starck auff die Einigkeit daß nicht der geringste zusamen satz kann gedultet werden.

Wezlar: Das ADONAI ZIDKENU [=Gott, unsere Gerechtigkeit] ist der anstoß im Jrmiah, einem Superintendenten allhier habe einmahl die sache vorgestellt, daß Jerusalem heiße ADONAI SCHAMMAH [=Gott hörte], daß ARON BERIS [=Heilige Truhe] heiße ADONAI, er hat auff der Kanzel davon geredet, daß ihm jemand ein liecht gegeben, aber nach der hand habe erfahren, daß er nur flu(?)ttiret. Ich: dieses ist der wichtigste punct, niemand kann ablangen, daß das SCHEM HUVAI [=verborgener Name] Gott zu komme lebend, darbey will er erkant seyn, niemand kann auch läugnen, daß der HAMISBEACH [=Opferaltar], ARON BERIS, JERUSCHALAIM, den nahmen Gottes getragen, weil Gott seinem nahmen daselbst eine ruhung gemacht; nimand ist auch, der einen Zweyten oder dritten Gott glaubte. Wezler: Ich weiß, daß sie nur Einen Gott glauben.

Ich: Wir haben das SCHMA Marc. 12 auch unser MASCHIACH hat sich selbst zu keinem Gott gemacht, das sagt ferne, darauff kommet es an, daß wir verstehen, was misch. c. 8 stehet, von der CHOCHMAH [=Weisheit], die gewesen, vor anfang, vor den tagen der ewigkeit, auch daß wir verstehen, was Mich. c.5 von einem ausgang von anfang vor den tagen der ewigkeit geredet wird, und was da seye die DEAH [=Meinung] der KEDOSCHIM [=Heiligen] Prov. 30 p.3,4,5.

Wezler: Darauff ist schon geantwortet worden. Ich: Antwort stehet hie und da, aber wir halten darvor, daß ein Messias, als bloses DAM [=Blut] und BASER [=Fleisch] keine GULA [=Erlösung] geben konne, Gott selbst nimmet sich den GOEL [=Erlöser] Es.54. Er selbst nennet sich den MELECH [=König], und finden wir solche PSUCKIM [=Versen], als Es. 60 p.1,2 in *KUMI URI* [= komme, wache auf] daß jehovah selbst erscheinet, wann MASCHIACH erscheinet. Wie kann das seyn?

**[176r]** Wezler: In Catechismus habe gelesen, daß Messias gelitten. Ich habe gelesen, der Vatter ist ewig, der Sohn ist ewig, der H. Geist ist ewig, und sind doch nicht drey ewige, sondern nur ein Ewiger Gott, ich habe gelesen, daß sich Gott das leyden zugeignet. Nun hat er erst gelitten in der Zeit, wie kann der Sohn seyn, wie der Vatter, da das Leyden in der Zeit geschehen, da der Vatter nicht gelitten, und doch soll einer seyn, wie der ander. Ich: So kommet ihr nicht aus der Suche, MASCHIACH ist getodtet nach seinem BASER und DAM, aber er ist lebendig gemacht nach seinem Geist, da ist nach der Gottheit, die sich mit ihme beheftet, und ihm die krafft gegeben, in der er aufferstanden. Wann aller welt *BESER* [=Fleisch] und *DAM* [=Blut] nur solte zusamen fließen, so möchten sie keine *CIPPURET* [=Sühne] oder *ZEDEK OLAMIM* [=ewige Gerechtigkeit] auswircken, aber dieweil stehet Es. 43 daß BRIS [=Bund] Gott mühe gemacht mit unser Sunden, so muß man es dahin ausdeuten, das gewicht kommet von Gott her. Jud: Wie kann es aber seyn, daß er leydet, und einen leydet nicht, und doch sind sie eins. Ich: Sie sind eines nicht nach dem Leyden, dann die Gottheit kann nicht leyden, es ist ein mißverstand. Wann Israel gemarert wider der *SCHECHINAH* in der *MIDBAR* [=Wüste], wann sie gemurert, und erbittert den *RUACH HAKODESCH* [=Heiligen Geist], so heißt es, sie haben gemurret wider Gott, es spricht die *TORAH* von einem *MALACH* [=Engel] Es. 23 und doch stehet, daß sie wider den *MALACH* gestritten. Gott eignet sich also etwas zu. Wezler: Von allem will gerne reden, nur davon nicht, wie Gott seye *AB, BEN und RUACH* [=Vater, Sohn und Geist]. Ich: Ihr begreiffet diese Sache nicht recht, dann *EMUNAH NOZERIM* [=christlicher Glaube] tauffet nicht *BESCHEMOS* [=in den Namen (pl.)], sondern *BASCHEM* [=im Namen (sig.)] *AB, BEN* und *RUACH HAKODESCH*. Was ander die *NOZERIM* [=Christen] verstehen durch *AB, BEN VERUACH* nur *PANIM* deutsch heißet es personen, die *PANIN* kommen vor in euren Bücher. Jud: Wo? Ich: in den 13. Glaubens articul, woselbst man lieset: *BESCHUM PANIM* [=unter keinen Umständen]. Wezler Wann man gestalten machen wolte, so ist er doch ein *JACHID* [=Einzelner]*.* Ich: *PANIM* gibt man nicht wohl durch gestalten, die sind nicht in Gott, es gehet alles *RUCHIOS* [=?] zu, Wann man *RUACH HAKODESCH* **[176V]** *SCHECHINAH*, *MIMRA DI ADONAI* [=Äußerung Gottes]*, METATRON*[?] recht erkläret, so konnet ihr beser übereinkommen. Jud: davon will auch rechts wißen. Ich bleibe bey dem einigen lebendigen Gott. Ich: das ist ganz recht, den verwerffe zu erst, wer *ELOCHIM ACHERIM* [=andere Götter] lehret, das ist die rechte *AVODAH SARAH* [=Götzendienst]*.* Wezler: dieses Buch halte hoch, [^36]ספר חוכת הלבנה, darin wird gelehrt, die *SCHAAR* [=Tor] den *JACHID* [=Einzelner] zu erkennen, es wird auffgethan die *SCHAAR,* daß man Gott erkennen sole aus dem Buch der Schöpffung, folget so dann die *SCHAAR zur AVODAH* [=Tor der Arbeit], daß man Gott zu dienen schuldig seye, dann kommet die *SCHAAR* von unsern Sunden, die *SCHAAR* vom demüthigung, die *SCHAAR* von *TSCHUBE* [=Buße/Bekehrung]*,* die *SCHAAR* von der *AHOLOT* [Opfer?]. Dieses *SEPHER* [=Buch] hat gemacht Rabbi Bechai bar Joseph, ist in Amsterdam Jüdisch teutsch gesagt, drey mal hab es erkauffet vor meine Kinder. Wer so lebet, der helet recht. Ich: das ist die *SCHAAR TORAH* aber wie kommen wir darzu, daß wir eintretten in die *SCHAAR* von Vollkommener liebe, ohne einige *AVERO* [=Sünde(n)]. Und weil kein *BEN ADAM* [=Mensch] ohne *JEZER HARO* [=Erbsünde[^37]] ist und eigene sunde, wo stehet die *SCHAAR* zur *CIPPORAH* [=Sühne]. Wezler: Ich schreye zu Gott, und spreche: du bisst ein *EL RACHUM* [=gnädiger Gott], du weißt daß ich mir selbst nicht helffen kann, ich bin dein geschöpff, du hast mich gemacht, darum stehet meine hülffe allein bey dir. Also suche ich Gottes gnad. Ich: dieser anfang ist recht guth, wann aber Gott glauben fordert, und der glaub soll sich an Gottes wort, Zusage, Verspruch und Verheißung halten, ob es gleich die Vernunfft nicht fasset, wie kommen wir zu recht. Wezler: Ja durch glauben müßen wir seelig werden. Ich: wann wir dann durch glauben seelig werden, wie geschrieben stehet, *ZADIK BAEMUNATO JCHJEH* [=ein Gerechter soll in seinem Glauben leben]. Welches ist das Wort deß glaubens? Ich trieb es aus Es. 50 durch sein erkäntnus wird er mein Knecht der gerecht Viel gerecht machen. Weg[en] dieser Umstand erklarte was christe glauben. Wezler fragte nach meinem nahmen, und **(177r)** schrieb solchen auff den disch, wegen übergebener Bücher bedanckte er sich, seine Liebe gegen Christen war gegrundet in diesem wort, weil er (Jesus) uns ein so großes werck geleistet, diesen Wezler vergleiche mit Hirsch Kaiser[^38] nur daß er jünger und im mitten alter ist. Er hält von den Juden nicht allzuviel, bizeugt aber vor andern daß kein rechten Jud verachtung auff wahre Christen lege, das Werck wann man sich einer deutlicher erkläre, gefiel ihm sehr wohl, bekante, daß er gleich den *AM RAZIM* [=?] kein harte Jud ware, den Evangelischen ließ er einen Vorzug, beklagt aber, daß man nicht viel LAMDANIM [=Gelehrten] finde, die mit Juden recht auff den *SCHORESCH* [=Würzel] reden. Ich habe ihm versprochen, daß mit Gottes Hlffe den Juden nach und nach viel puncten vom Christenthum werden vernehmliger vorgetragen werden. So viel davon, der Gott welcher dieses Herz erwecket, der Warheit nachzuforschen, der gebe, daß andere bald nachfolgen, und mit Gott zu recht gehen, wie sie von der blindheit erlöset, und zum Wahren Licht gelangen mögen.

## Source 2 Original Text

2. Ein Auszug aus dem Reisetagebuch von JOHANN ANDREAS MANITIUS auf seiner Reise in den Harz, nach Franken, Hessen u. Norddeutschland, 01.01.1733, AFSt/H, K 57

**Zweiter Besuch der pietistischen Missionare in Celle, September 1733**

**144r:** (Überschrift) Zell d. 2. u. 3. Dec. 1733. Besuch des Jud Wetzlars ...

„d. 2. Dec.: wir nach Zell komen ... Die hiesige Juden ... wohnen daselbst in der vorstadt, etwa 10. bis 12. Hauß-gesäß, einige sind reich, sonderlich der Wetzlar , welches auch der gelehrteste und beste seyn soll. D. 3. Dec.: gingen wir beyde vor deßen Hauß, weil sich mein gef. express vorgenomen hatte, ihn diesesmal zu sprechen, da er uns, wie aus den vorigen bekannt von der Geh. Räth. von Münchhausen recomendireten[^39] aber er war verreiset, indeßen war sein sohn der eben vor der Thüre stunde recht freundlich gegen uns und sagte daß er morgen wiederkoen werde, Er habe noch die drey Bücher, welche ihn m. Gef. zu lesen gegeben in guter Verwahrung in seinem Spinde verschloßen, dis war uns lieb, mein Gefährte zeigte ihm das JOREH DEAH[^40] u. den jüd-Brief[^41], und bat solches seinem Vater zu überreichen, als er sich aber entschuldigte, er weiße nicht, ob ers annehmen dürffe, nahm ers wieder, und gab es einem anderen, der dazu kam. **[144v]** Es kam auch der CHASSAN dazu, der wolte wißen, was es für Bücher wären, besahe sie, und wunderten sich, daß Joreh deah teutsch übersetzt wäre, sie meinten es sey ein Stück aus ihrem talmud. M. Gef. hatte von einem Exemplar, wie er mir gesagt die Vorrede weggethan[^42], Als sich nun mehrere Versamleten, theileten wir mehrere Bücher unter sie aus, einer in das Wetzlars Hause bekam die Epist. an die Römer[^43] und noch einen Brief. Zwey andere bekamen eine jagl. Ein JOREH DEAH und jüd.Brief. noch theilte ich 1 brief einer Frau mit. Gott laße es unter ihnen geseegnet seyn!

Hier sind die Jüden noch tractabler gewesen als in Hannover, sie laßen doch noch mit sich reden, u. nehmen die Bücher zur Prüfung an, lesen u. behalten sie. Als wir nun weiter gingen, weil sich verjetzo eben keiner in ein langes Gespräch einlaßen konte, da sie alle verrichtungen hatten, und wir in einen Gasthof gehen wolten ein wenig zu Frühstücken, schaueten aus einem Fenster gegen uns über Mann und Frau heraus, und sahen auf uns, dieses bewog uns nach genoßenen Frühstück dahin zu gehen, der Mann wolte mit uns vor der thür sprechen, die Frau aber bat, daß wir ein wenig in ihr Hauß treten möchten. M. Gef. gab bald den Brief, der Mann sahe ihn an, und sagte, ich sehe wohl ihre gantze Sache steht darauff, daß MESCHIACH schon gekomen und dann erklären sie das 53. Cap. Jesaia von ihm, mein Gef. zeiget aus dem 52. Daß er müste von dem Messia verstanden werden, der Jude aber konte es kaum erwarten, und sagte er wolle ihm nur eins fragen, er habe schon viele Pfarrer gefragt, keiner aber legte es ihm so aus, daß ers verstehend und annehmen könne. Mal. Ult. HINNE ANI SCHOLEICH LOCHEM ES ELIHU HANOBI LIPHNE 60 JOM ADANNOI HAGADUL VEHANAUROH [=Siehe, ich will euch senden den Propheten Elia, ehe denn da komme der große und schreckliche Tag].[^44] M. Gef. antwortete aus Jechis(?) 11, da auch von dem schrecklichen tag der über Jerusalem komen werde, die Rede ist, und combinirte beyde Stellen also daß er daraus dem Schluß machte, weil der JOM HAGADUL VEHANAUROH über Jerusal. Komen ist und sie ist verstöhret worden, das Land auch noch mit Cherem geschlagen ist, so muß auch **[145r]** das erste Wahr geworden seyn. Weil er aber damit nicht zufrieden war und jetzt nicht länger Zeit hatte, so beredeten wir uns, diesen Abend um 5. Uhr wieder zusamen zu komen. M. Gef. gab ihm das Joreh Deah, er behielt solches, samt dem Brief. Die Frau erzehlte, daß sie schon vor einem Jahr von m. Gef. gehört, da er in weißen Roß gewesen, habe der Jude Meyer mit seiner Frau da logirt, und habe gegen ihr bezeugt, daß sie große HANOAH [=Vergnügen] von des Mannes Rede gehabt, und mit Freuden ihn angehört hätten, weil er so gut hebräisch sprachen können, dieses hatte wol fürnehml. diese Leute excitirt mit uns jetzo zu reden.  
...

**[145v]** ... zu den Juden in der Vorstadt ging. Dieser war eben hinweggegangen, und also trafen wir nur die Frau mit ihren kleinen Kindern an. Diese bekam bey solcher Gelegenheit eine gute Zurede, nachdem sie uns sehr freundlich und wohl empfangen hatte. Sie erzelte nochals, was sie vor einem Jahr von meinem Gef. da er im Gasthoff zum weißen Roß sich aufgehalten, gehört, wie der Jude Meyer seine Frau, und andere die da ab u. zugegangen, alle bezeugt hätten, daß sie große HANAE (הנאה) an seinem gespräch gehabt. Sie erzehlt, daß der Rabbiner in Hannover alle tage und zwar also feste, daß er nicht eher als das Abends eße, und --- einen Herring haben müße. Mein Gef. sagte daß solches kein Fasten könne genannet werden, weil viele unter uns wären, welche auch nur alle 24 Stunde einahl äßen. Wenn das fasten dazu gebraucht würde, daß man recht in der Seele fasten könne, oder sein Hertz recht zu Gott u. götlichen dingen lencken **[146r]** Sie fragte, ob wir nicht verheyrathet wären, und preisete uns glückseelig, daß wir noch ledig wären, weil wir mehr Zeit hätten zu Gottes Worth, und nicht so geg---et würden von den Kindern. Es würde ihr auch der Entzwck unserer Reise gesagt, weil sie wißen wollte, warum wir nicht Prediger würden? Welche grade uns von dem Juden in diesen Landen oft vorgelegt wird. Endlich zeigte er ihr deutlich, wie ihre Gebeten Gott unangenehm und mißfällig auch deßwegen ohne Erhörung wären, welches ihr sehr nahe ging, und einen geseegneten Scrupel wird erwecket haben.

Endlich kam der Mann aber verborgen, denn er war nur deßwegen auf die Seite gegangen, daß er der Unterredung entgehen möchte. Als er aber merckte, daß wir nicht weggingen, kam er herein nahm den Brief und das Joreh Deah, u. sagte vom Brief, er habe es gelesen, und wohl gesehen, daß es ihnen gantz contrair geschrieben wäre. M. Gef. war(?) deutsch heraus, er will sagen es sey Scheker, Jud. Nein so grob wolle ers nicht sagen, er sage nur es sey ihnen contrair, das 53. Cap. Erklärten wir vom Meschiach, das wiße er wol, das könten sie aber nicht thun. M. Gef. machte es ihm deutsch aus Zach. 111, Dan. 9 u. dem vorhergehanden 52 Cap., daß nothwendig der Messias müße gemeinet seyn, Es gefiel mir wohl an diesen Juden, daß er so artig seine dubia oder zweiffelspuncke vorbrachte, immer mit der Redensart: er könne es nicht begreiffen, daß d. Ex. Wir durch das Blut des Meschiachs erlöset würden, it[em] daß er ein König der gantzen Welt sey, da er doch nicht vor der gantzen welt öffentlich als ein Solcher erklärt worden, auch so viel Völcker noch wären, die ihn nicht dafür erkennen könten[^45], Endlich kam m. Gef. da er ihm diese puncte beantwortet hatte auch auf den heutigen punct vom Elia und erläuterte ihm solches nach den -------, sunderlich durch die gegeneinanderhaltung des Zustandes Elia mit dem Zustand des Gehamnis(?).

Als er dieses alles mit angehöret, behielt er doch den breif und das Joreh Deah, u man merckte an ihm, daß er einige lust bekomen hatte der wahrheit weiter nachzuforschen, dazu ich göttlichen Seegen wünsche, Er ist sonst derjenige, der den Armen den Allmosen austheilen muß (ein GABBE) den Namen dieses Juden habe ich nicht erfahren, er trug ein schwartzes Kleid und schien ein armer zu seyn, wenn wir wieder durchreisen sollten, so wird er von uns zuerst besucht werden.

...  
**[146v]** D. 4. Dec. Heute Vormittag gingen wir beyde wieder aus, ob wir etwa gelegenheit bekomen möchten, mit einigen Juden in ein Gespräch zu komen, aber es wolte sich keine finden; wir gingen zu dem Hl. Wetzlar, er war wiedergekomen, aber ließ sich eben rasiren, und durch seine Frau excusiren, daß er jetzt nicht Zeit hätte, weil er erst wiedergekomen und wenn er rasirt wäre, gleich auszugehen hätte. Wir gingen also weiter und begnügten uns vorjetzo damit, daß wir ihm mit guter Gelegenheit die neue Bücher in die Hände gebracht.

Da wir weiter niemanden sehen und finden könten, gingen wir in das Hauß, wo wir gestern gewesen, er war aber auch nicht zu Hause, daher wir kurtz von der Frau Abschied nahmen, und weil es noch gut Wetter war, machten wir uns diesen Mittag noch auf den Weg u. verließen Zelle. "*Der andere Missionar fügte diesen Eindrücken hinzu:[^46]*

Der Jud Wetzlar ist gestern nachts nach Hauß gekommen, mit meinem gefehrten gieng [ich] vor seine Stüben-Thür, er ließe sich eben den Bardt abscheeren, und entschuldigen, daß er vor- und nachmittag in der Stadt zu arbeiten, sollten ihm nicht übel nehmen. Auß allen merckte [ich], daß obiger Jud, der ein Buch in seinem Haus empfangen, samt andern solchen bereits berichtet. Wezlar stehet an in dem articul von der Gottheit Christi, ich war auch gefaßt, solchem etliche Zeugnuße vorzulegen, weil aber joreh deah ohn dem darauff in etlichen Fragen gehet, so wird er damit zu thun haben. Man hat an der Juden viele Bollwerck abzubrechen, und niederzureißen, bis man recht grund legen kann. Die Zeller sind noch tractabler, als die andere, solches ruhret daher, weil sie vermeinen, durch gelindigkeit zu siegen, oder zu Flattiren, doch mag man mehreren(?) im Wezlar stecken, weil die seinige sich noch liebreich und freundlich erwiesen.

## Source 3 Original Text

3. Tagebuch von JOHANN ANDREAS MANITIUS über seine Reise in den Harz, nach Franken, Hessen und Norddeutschland vom 1.1.1733, AFSt/H, K 57

**Eindrücke der Missionare in ihrem zweiten Besuch in Frankfurt am Main:**

***[62v]** In einem Gespräch mit einem Hn. Gentzel in Frankfurt am Main:*

Wir ... hörten ... theils wie es hier mit der Judenschafft stehe; Er wuste einige artige und remarquable Nachrichten zu geben, theils wie er selbst bisweilen Gelegenheit gehabt mit einigen zu sprechen, die ihn gerne gehöret, theils wie auch andere solches gethan, als sonderlich der Hochmann von Hachenau[^47], der ihnen hier öffentlich in der Schule gepredigt hätte. Item er habe ein Buch gehabt, welches 1720 in Leipzig von einem Namens BOOCK in octav deutsch und Hebräisch gedruckt worden, worinn die Christliche Lehre aus Jüdischen Büchern mit ihren eigenen worten vorgetragen wäre, als er solches dem Juden gegeben, habe ers geküßt und eifrig zu sich genomen, um solches zu lesen, über eine Zeit aber ist er wiedergekumen, und hat gantz betrübt endlich gesagt, er sey über das Buch in den CHEREM gethan und also hart sollen sie noch jetzo verfahren. ...

**63v** [...] *Eine ziemliche Interessenlosigkeit der Frankfurter Juden für die Studiosi:*

D. 3. Octobr gingen wir beyde aus und zwar weil es Schabbas war, mitten durch die Juden-Gaße. In ihre Schule sahen wir nur hinein ein bekannter Jude, der ehemals dem Gespräch meines Gefährten mit dem Anschel Wormes beygewohnt, grüßte uns freundlich auf dem Vorhoff der Schule, Mein Gef. Sagte: Wir wären wieder hergekomen, und wolten sehen wie sie ihren SCHABBAS BERESCHIS (oder da sie das erste Buch Mosis in ihrer Schule wieder zu lesen anfangen) feyerten, und ob sie nun in der Zeit eine GOULLE [=Erlösung] erlangt hätten, er antwortete aber weiter nichts zu dieser Rede, als daß der Anschel Worms eben zu Hause wäre, wenn wir ihn sprechen wolten, träffen wir ihn gewiß an. Es war aber dieses nicht unsere Intention sondern wir wolten nur vorerst in genere ihren äußerlichen Zustand betrachten, und uns gleichsam öffentlich zeigen, daß wir wieder da wären, damit wer eine heimliche Begierde hätte, mit uns zu sprechen, derselbe sich nun nach uns jetzo mehr umsehen könne. Wir gingen also fort durch die Gaße hindurch bis hinten bey der allgemeinen Juden-Küche vorbey und zur engen Straßen hinaus, **[64r]** Nachgehends stellten wir uns auf die große Brücke über den Mayn, wo ich im vorigen Jahr mit verschiedenen geredet, es kam aber nur ein einiger noch lediger Jude mit seinem Cameraden zu uns, da wir eben im BRESCHIS [=Genesis] 5/5 כתנות עור lasen, da nun mein Gefährte unsern Discurs wiederhohlte, von den cosnaus aur, welches wort von den priesterlichen Kleidern hernach gebraucht wird, daher er zeigte, wie Gott ihm, dem Adam priesterliche Kleider und die Art sich mit Gott zu versöhnen gelehret habe. Darauf gab er ihm das Evangelium Lucae, und sagte, er mögte es ihm wieder zustellen, er werde öfters sich hier auf der brücken aufhalten, er hörte die Vorstellung ohne wiederspruch an, nahm das Buch begierig, und lase auf der Brücken darinn, wir haben es bis heut d. 7. hujus da ich dieses schreibe, noch nicht wieder. [...]

*Gezielter Versuch, die Gelehrten zu umgehen und ‚geneigten‘ Seelen zu erreichen(?):*

**64v** Als wir nach Frankfurth hereingingen sagte mein Gefährte dieses mahl habe er keine grose Lust mit den Gelehrten viel zu disputieren, sondern er wünschete gute Gelegenheit zu haben, daß er mit denen verborgenen Seelen möchte bekannt werden, welche Gott schon heimlich gezogen und gleichsam preparirt hätte, denn bey seolchen hoffe er ein mehrers aus zurichten, als bey den erstern, weil solche nur redeten, ihn abzuhalten von der eigentl. Geseegnten Arbeit.

... *Gespräch mit* einer Kauffmanns Wittwe Alleinsinn, *die den Studiosi bei der Suche nach den ‚verborgenen Seelen‘ helfen sollte*: ... als nun mein Gefährte den Entzweck[^48] unsers Besuchs angezeigt hatte, meldete sie von einer Jüdin namens Simla, daß sie ein eifriges Verlangen nach Christo hätte, allein den Punckt von der Dreyeinigkeit zu glauben, sey ihr zu schwer, indeßen führe sie einen guten Wandel, sey auch reich an Wercken der Liebe, ... **(65r)** ... die Jüdin Simla (eine Wittwe welche auch nicht in der Jüden-Gaße wohnet, sondern unter den Christen, aber böse Kinder hat, die sie gleich angeben würden, wenn man zu

2 = Die allgemeine (Herzens-)Bekehrung der Juden zu Jesus und dem Christentum.

ihr ginge u. des Glaubens halber mit ihr spräche) [sey] in Armuth gerathen, daß habe die Frau Gevatterin auch bey sich gefühlt, und ihr wieder aus der Noth zu helffen etwas gebracht. [...] Noch erzehlte sie, daß die Jüdin oft bey dem hr. D. Dusedang in Offenbach gewesen, der sie und noch mehrere frome Jüden kennen werde. Ihr wäre noch der Jude Gerson bekannt, der zwar eben keine geneigtheit zur christl. Religion von sich mercken ließe, doch sey er ein verständiger Jude, und rede auch gern mit Christen von Glaubes-Sachen. Er sey etliche mal unter dem Druck gewesen, das mache ihn zahm. [...]

*Gespräch mit dem Separatisten*[^49] *D. Dusedang in Offenbach*

**(65v)** [...] C.d.5. Octobr. Nach Offenbach gingen, [...] um weiter zu erforschen, ob nicht auch an diesem Ort, der nur eine Stunde von Franckfurth gelegen ist, verborgene gute Gemüther unter den Juden sind. Als wir zu ihm kamen, und nachdem wir freundlich von ihm empfangen waren, dieses unser begehren eröften, sagte er von einer Jüdinn, daß sie dem Christenthum sehr nahe wäre, dieselbe sey oft bey ihm, und so gar einige mal mit in (der Separatisten) Versamlung gewesen, er nannte den Namen nicht, aber es war vermuthlich die Simla. Von den hiesigen wolte er uns keinen bekannt machen, doch sagte er, daß auch unter ihnen redliche Gemüther wären. Einer sey vordem alhier gewesen, der aber nun gestorben, der habe mit seiner Frau des Tages nicht mehr als drey Kreutzer verzehrt, und sich äußerst beflißen das Gesetz Gottes so viel ihm nur möglich gewesen, unverbrüchlich zu halten, sonderlich habe der Juden den armen, auch unter den Christen, viel gutes gethan, wenn er einen dürftigen gesehen, habe er ihn zu sich gerufen und Geld geliehen, wen ers denn wiederbringen wollen, hat er gesagt: Behalts nur, vielleicht habt ihrs nöthiger als ich, zuletzt habe er doch auf seinem Sterbe-Lager bekennen müßen, daß Gott ein sehr heiliger Gott sey, und sein Gesetz so vollkomen, daß es ein sterblicher Mensch unmöglich halten könne.[^50] [...]

**(67r)** *Der 07.10. war ein regnerischer Tag, erst nachmittags konnten die Studiosi ihre Unterkunft verlassen; sie haben sich aufgeteilt, der Eine ging auf die Brücke, der Andere in die Stadt. Manitius, der zur Brücke ging, fand* keine Gelegenheit dieses mal für mich, ich ging hinunter an das Waßer, da etliche Juden in das Schiff stiegen, aber auch da konte ich nichts anbringen, endlich ging ich auch in die Stadt, und da sahe ich meinen Gef. Mitten auf der Strasse zwischen 6. bis 8. Juden stehen und reden, ich ging auf der Seite weiter und gedachte, Gott werde mir auch Gelegenheit bescheren, so kam auch ein Jude der eben hinaus gehen wolte, weil er eine Stünde von hier auf einen Dorff wohnet, ich fragte ihn, ob er heut viel gewonen? ob er noch Lust zu handeln hätte? Er: Ob ich denn was hätte? Ich sagte ja, wenn es ihm nur anstunde! als ich das Büchlein zeigte, sagte er, o das ist eins von den neuen Büchern! und ging davon. Ich ging weiter, da begegnete mir ein bekannter Rebbi aus Friedberg, den ich ehemals hier auf der Brücken, und in darmstadt gesprochen, wir kannten uns gleich und bewillkomten uns freundlich, ich fragte: Wie ists bis daher gegangen? **[67v]** Jude: Gott lob und Dank noch alles gut, ich lobe Gott über alles, es mag mir auch gehen, wie es will, wir sind schuldig unsern Herrn Gott zu loben fürs Böse so wohl als für das gute. Darauf erzehlte er mir daß er jetzt seine Tochter aus steuren wolle, und daß seine lottery nun bald werde gezogen werden. ich fragte ihn endlich, ob er denn nun die Büchlein gelesen hätte, da ich einen nach Friedberg gebracht? Er: Ach ja, aber! Weiter sagte er nichts, ich sagte hingegen, jetzt habe ich ein gantz neues Buch, das möchte ich ihm wünschen, daß ers einmal mit Bedacht läse! Allein er bezeugte mit Geberden sich so kaltsinnig, daß ich weiter nichts sagte als: Ich weiß wohl daß mancher so voll ist von begierde nach DIBRE AULOM HASSEH [=den Dingen Diesseits‘], daß er an OLAM HABBO [=Jenseits/Nachwelt] nicht gedencken kann. Und damit nahm ich Abschied, er merckte aber wol, daß ich ihn damit reprimundiren wolte, und sagte, Nein OLAM HABBO geht vor alles vorgezogen werden. So from und heilig konte dieser verkehrte harte Jude sprechen, und blieb doch in seinem stoltzen Sinn! [...]

d. 8. October: ***[68r]*** [...] Nachmittags ging ich aus auf die Brücke mit Juden zu sprechen, als ich eine ziemliche Zeit gewartet hatte, kam endlich ein junger wilder Bursch zu mir, und wolte etwas handeln, ich sagte, daß ich zwar was hätte, aber ich wüste schon zum voraus, ihm würde es nicht anstehen, als ich nun ein Büchlein zeigte, sprang er bis 8 Schritt von mir gleich als wenn ich ihn etwas Leides hätte zufügen wollen, da er von ferne stünde, sagte er ich wäre ein MESCHUMED [=Konvertit], ein anderer älterer Jude, der ein Musicant und zu Offenbach wohnhafft war, kam dazu und sagte, nein, ich sehe ihn für keinen MESCHUMED an, ich sagte: seht wie der arme Mensch vor **[68v]** das gute Büchlein fliehet, so geht’s einem, wenn man nur lauter DIBRE AULOM HABBO [= Dinge des Jenseits] führet, Nein sagte der andere, der Musicant, das macht nur die Furcht, wir sind in GOLUS, der Hn. weiß wir müßen uns in acht nehmen, da bezeugte ich daß er nicht meinen dürffe, daß ich es also machen werde, wie der

Eisenmenger[^51], ich suchte alles zum besten zu kehren und aus Liebschafft zu den JEHUDIM [=Juden] rede ich manches Wort für sie. Weil er sich nun ruhmte, daß er weit gereiset sey, die Biebel gelesen habe, und wiße den Unterschied zwischen allen Religionen, so bat ich ihn, er möchte mir doch sagen, was CHADDESCH EMUNAH [=erneuerter(?) Glaube] glaube, ich wolte hören ob ers auch recht wiße. Er wolte aber nicht mit den Worten heraus, endlich brachte ich ihn doch, so weit, daß er sagte: Sie glauben daß ihr Messias sey der rechte Messias gewesen, und werde wiederkomen groß und herrlich, nu wenn er wieder kömt und sich also beweiset, wie ihr sagt, so werden wirs auch glauben daß ers sey, ihr glaubt er sey ein großer NOBI [נביא= Prophet] gewesen, aber wie komt das dazu, daß er sey ELOHAI [=mein Gott]? TOPHLE EMUNEH [=Ungläubigen(?)] aber macht sich PSILIM [=Götzen] ich sagte: Wahr ists daß ihr TOPHLE EMUNEH bald könt überwinden und mit Gottes Wort heraus werffen, aber ich möchte gern sehen, wie ihr CHADDESCH EMUNEH[^52] überwinden köntet, das würde euch ein wenig schwerer werden, sie sitzen zu fest in Gottes Wort. Er sagte hier dürfte man nicht reden, ich solte nur nach Amsterdam gehen, da würden sie es mir bald sagen. Ich bezeugte, daß man auch gegen mir im Vertrauen reden könne, ich wolte schon sorgen, daß den Juden kein Schade daher entstehen solle, da entschuldigte er sich, auf der Gaße schicke es sich nicht, (wir waren durch Saxenhausen und durch die Weinberge fast durchgegangen, darauf sagte er es werde ihn lieb seyn, wenn ich ihm in Offenbach zusprechen werde, Er hieße Joseph Geiger. von dem D. Dussedang ruhmte er vieles, deßen ich schon oben etwas gedacht habe, so viel als nöthig ist. **]...[**

**[69r]** 9. October ging ich vormittags aus und suchte gelegenheit mit Juden zu sprechen, einer aus Pergel nahe bey diesem Ort gelegen, begegnete mir, und da ich ihm den jüdischeteutschen Brief zeigte, wolte er demselben für 1. Kreutzer abkauffen, ich gab ihm aber das JOREH DEAH[^53] dafür, und schenckte ihm den Brieff, er eilete zwar wieder fort, doch konte ich ihm sagen, daß er aus dem Büchlein, wenn ers mit KWONE [=Absicht] LEINEN [=Lernen] würde, viel CHOCHMA [=Weisheit] nehmen könne. Er fragte, ob ich ein Bücherhändler wäre,

ich nein sondern als ein reisender Student habe ich solch Buch bey mir, und wo ich einen guten Mann finde, so schenckte ichs ihm wol, wie ich dann in Heßen viel verschenckt hätte. Ob ich hier in der Gaße gewesen? (Verstehe in der Juden-Gaße, denn die wird [griechisch (A.S.)] nur die Gaße genannt) Ich, ja ich bin auch drinn gewesen aber mit Büchern handele ich eben nicht. Er es stehet doch kein Ort, wo es gedrückt worden. Ich es ist mit Fleiß weggeleßen, ihr Könnt aber aus den Büchlein sonderlich sehen, wie die MASCHICHIIM [=Christen[^54]], die so viel von dem MESCHIACH halten, als Klar aus der THAURE NEBIIM und KSUBIM [=Pentateuch] beweisen können. Darauf gingen wir voneinander. ...

D. 10. Octobr ... **[73r] [**...] ging mein Gefährte in die Juden-Gaße und ich ging nach Hause, weil er gern allein gehen wolte. Ich aber kein Hertz diesesmahl dazu hatte, Gott wolle mirs verzeihen, wenn ich mich darinn versündiget habe, mein Hertz ist gantz verschloßen gewesen, weil ich gesehen, **[73v]** daß sie sich hier gantz verhärtet haben, gestern redete ich einen alten an, am AREF SCHABBAS [=Schabbatsabend] kamen aber nicht weiter in der Rede, als daß einige Juden mehr von der ESREVARBE [=vierundzwanzig = Pentateuch] andere mehr von der GOMOREHE u. TALMUD hielten, da er denn gestunde, daß er sich an die ESREVARBE halte, bald aber schied er sich von mir, weil er merckte, daß ich mit ihm was gutes reden wolte, welches mir den Wehe that, Gott erbarme sich des armen Volcks und schließe ihre harte Hertzen auf, damit daß heilsame Waßer des süßen Evangelii hineinfließen könne. ...

**74r**: D. 11. Octobr [...] Wir kamen also mittags in Offenbach, und traffen beym Eingang einen alten Juden auf der Straße an, der uns die Nachricht gab, daß hier bis 80. Familien wohnhafft wären, der RAAF [=Rabbiner] dieser KEHÜLLE [=Gemeinde] sey in Friedberg, es sey aber hier ein gelehrter BIMKUM [=Stellverterter] oder VICE-RAAF, ferner gingen eben zwey baumeister[^55], oder Jüdische Gerichtsherren vorbey, da sagte er uns zur Nachricht, daß sie heute die streitige Sachen abthäten, weil sie sonst nichts zu thun hätten, und würde der BIMKUM um 1. Uhr auch dabey seyn müßen [...]

[A]ls wir kaum aufgestanden waren, und die Straße hinunter gingen, kam ein Baumeiser gantz hitzig hinter uns her, m.Gef. redete ihn an, und er war bereit zur Antwort, weil er ohndes gern mit uns reden wollen, er fragte **[76r]** Er fragte bald, ob wir Bücher verkauften? Wir sagten heut nicht, es ist SCHABBAS. Jud. Ob wir nicht welche ausgetheilt hätten? M.Gef. wir geben kein Buch hinweg, als wo wir einen verständigen fromen Mann antreffen, der es brauchen und lesen

8 Die Bezeichnung der ‚Messianischen‘ gaben sich die Pietisten selbst, um zu betonen, dass sie den (wahren) Messias bereits erkannt haben.  
9 Die jüdischen Vorsteher in Frankfurt hießen so.

kan. Unter dem gemeinen Volck ist kein Buch gekumen, wie er nun eins begehrte zu sehen, so zeigte ihm mein Gef. das JOREH DEAH, er gab es aber bald zurück, und ließ die verwegene Worte von sich hören: Wenn es nicht Sontag wäre, so wolte ich mit ihnen zum Amptmann gehen, bald ließ er sich noch einmahl hören: Wenn wir bis Abend hierbleiben, so wolte er mit uns zum Amtmann gehen, M. Gef. sagte, daß wir uns dafür gar nicht zu fürchten hätten, wir wolten die ersten seyn, denn wir wüsten wohl was wir thäten, und hätten auf unsern Wegen allezeit Gott und die Obrigkeit vor Augen, daß wir alles wol verantworten könten. Als sich nun bey der Unterredung mit diesem Mann Jude und Jüdische Weiber u. Kinder um uns herum versamleten, und uns zum Spott haben wollen, so zeigte mein Gef. ihnen noch mehr, daß wir uns für der Obrigkeit nicht zu fürchten hätten, sagte: Wenn ihr so fort mocht, so gehen wir zum Amptmann und laßen euch in *Arrest* nehmen, seyd gewarnet und gehet mit reisenden Stüdenten (dann er mochte uns für getaufte Juden ansehen) also um, wie sichs gebühret, damit ihr nicht in Schaden komt, denn wir begehren euch nicht in Schaden zu bringen, ihr müßt aber Reisenden die Höfflichkeit und Ehrerbietigkeit erweisen, die man euch erweiset, sind wir nicht freundlich mit euch umgegangen, daß wir bey dem Rabbi gewesen, das wißet ihr, Niemand haben wir hier was zu leyde gethan, ihr habt euch auch nicht zu fürchten, daß ihr durch uns werdet in Schaden komen, wie es vor 25. Jahren geschehen, da man euch die schule so lange zugeschloßen, biß ihr ein schweres Straffgeld gegeben. Der Baumeister als er solches hörte wurde bald angst und bange und bat, daß wir doch auf die unverständige Weiber nicht requrdiren **[76v]** möchten, was er gesagt, solten wir nicht so übel nehmen, sie müsten genau acht geben, weil sie einmal gewitziget wären, damit sie nicht wieder in Schaden kämen. Damit waren nun wir und er zufrieden, daher wir uns einander SCHALOM wünschten, und aus einander gingen. Daß mein Gef. den Juden mit dem Arrest drohete, dunckte mir etwas hartes zu seyn, indem ich dafür halte, daß ein Christ lieber leyden solte, allein wenn es aus der Absicht geschehen, den Juden abzuhalten und zu warnen, daß er sich nicht selbst in Schaden bringe, und aller weitläuftigkeit zu entgehen, so billige ichs und lobe es als ein Kluges Verfahren.

Nun hätten wir uns zwar nichts zu fürchten gehabt, und also den Hr. D. Dusedang wol besuchen können, m.Gef. aber hielte es für beßer ihn diesesmahl zu verschonen, damit er nicht unsertwegen in einige Verantwortung käme, zumahl da ihn die Obrigkeit nicht allzugewegen seyn ... Wir gingen also nun grade zur Stadt hinaus, und ließen diese arme Judenschafft der erbarmenden Liebe Gottes über. O wie elend und jämmerlich sind die Menschen welche sich durch Antrieb des bösen Feindes so verpallisadiren(?), und sich bevestigen

und die edle Wahrheit in ihrer Ungerechtigekit aufhalten. Der Rebbi hatte unter andern auch diese Worte hören laßen, daß er werde ausgerufen werden auf dem Abend in der Schhul, wer ein Buch habe, müße es doch hergeben, daher ihn mein Gef. der ihn des andern tages wieder in der Stadt auf der Brücke angetroffen, gefragt hat, ob das Buch aus gerufen sey? Da er aber nichts gestehen wollen, sondern gesagt, weil nichts ausgetheilt wäre, dürffe man nichts ausruffen. ...

**(77v)** ... *(in einem Gespräch mit einem lokalen christlichen Gelehrten, erzählt dieser, warum seiner Meinung nach, die gute Botschaft an die Juden nicht gelangt)*

Auf Seiten der Juden sey dieses eine große Hinderniß, daß sie alles aufs schärffste verboten hätten unter sich, daß keiner sich darff was mercken laßen, daß er eine Neigung zu den Christen und ihren Büchern habe. Daher die meiste abgehalten würden, der wahrheit recht nachzudenken...

**78v:** Daß dem seel. Spener[^56] ehemals, als er in der Juden-Gaße auch hat lehren wollen, solches vom Magistrat alhier sey verboten worden, wurde mir gesagt, daß es nicht habe können EX THEOLOGICIS RATIONIBUS gesprochen, sondern EX POLITICIS, die er in einem seiner Theologischen Bedenken angeführt. ...

**[79r]** D. 13. Octobr [1733] ... *[Fazit über die Frankfurter Juden]*

Solchergestalt verließen wir nun Franckfurth am Mayn nach dem wir die verborgene gute Gemüther so viel wir diesesmahl gekönt, aufgesucht, und durch andere ihnen die nöthige Bücher heimlich zuzustellen besorgt haben, öffen[tlich] sind wir auch wohl, ich außer der Gaße, mein Gef. auch in der Gaße ihnen nachgegangen, haben auch einige wenige Bücher mit guter Gelegenheit unter sie gebracht, auch einige Gespräche gehalten, aber das Zeugniß behalten die Franckf. Juden, daß sie hart und eifrig sind in ihren Aberglauben, haben auch vermuthlich ein scharffes Verbot wieder unsere Bücher ausgehen laßen, und weil sie hier dem Handel so sehr ergeben, und sich für den Bann der Rabbinen mehr als für Gott fürchten, so haben wir wenig Eingang, wir hoffen aber Gott werde uns an anderen Orten wieder desto beßern Eingang schenken.

[^1]: The book is also known as ספר עמודי עולם. See MORRIS FAIERSTEIN: The Libes Briv of Isaac Wetzlar, Atlanta 1996. See also the presentation by Rebekka Voß: Striking a Pietist Chord: Isaac Wetzlar’s Proposal for the Improvement of Jewish Society.  
[^2]: This quote is taken from the opening sentences of the ‘Libes briv’. See FAIERSTEIN: Libes Briv, p. 43.

[^3]: With Meschamed, Widmann meant undoubtedly Meschumad, i.e. a convert.

[^4]: It cannot be clarified completely whether Widmann meant the so called big or small missive. The small (and missing) missive [starts with: אם על כל בני ישראל] was published already in 1729. The big missive [usually referred to as מכתב אהבה] was published on the 14th of January 1732. Both works were written by Johann Müller or are attributed to him.

[^5]: It was another missionary tract: Joannis Anastasii Freylinghausenii ‫דאש הערץ פון דען‬‎ [...] ‫לב לב בנים על אבותם‬‎ [...] ‫קינדרן צו אירן עלטרן וויידר גקרט‬‎ [...] Oratio de genuinis filiis Abrahami habita cum judaeus christianis sacris Initiaretur in vulgare Judaeorum idioma transferri curavit Jo. Henr. Callenberg, Halle 1731.

[^6]: ‎[...] ‫ספר מעשי השלוחים‬‎. [...] ‫דאש בוך פון דען גשיקטן דער שלוחים‬‎ [Acta Apostolorum in Germanicum Judaeorum idioma transferri curauit ediditque Io. Henr. Callenberg, Halle 1731.

[^7]: ‎‫אור לעת ערב‬‎ was one of the most successful missionary tracts of the Pietists of Halle. ‫יוחנן קימחי‬‎ (actually Johannes Müller): ‫להאיר עיני ישראל ויראו בנחמות ציון בשוב ה' ציון :אור לעת ערב.‬‎ Halle (Saale) 1728. In this case, it was probably the addition from 1732.

[^8]: ‎‫ספר עקרים ה"ה עקרי האמונה והתורה של עדת המשיחיים. דאס איזט טייטש דיא גרינדי פון דעם‬‎ Wetzlar probably refers to: ‫גלויבן און פון דער ערנונג פון דער גמיינדי דער משיחיים‬‎[...]. [Augustana confessio in germanicum Judaeorum idioma transferri curauit ediditque Io. Henr. Callenberg [...], Halle 1732. It could also be that he was referring to the missing work of Caspar Calvörs: Judenkatechismus, das ist, kurtzer weg des lebens zu dem Meßia und heylande der welt, gezeiget dem hause Israel; den unbekehrten zur erleuchtung, den bekehrten zur stärckung: aufs neue mit einer vorrede herausgegeben von Johann Heinrich Callenberg, Halle 1732.

[^9]: Actually ‫ספר חובות הלבבות‬‎ = „Duties of the Heart", from Bahya ibn Pakuda (approx. 1050-1120, Zaragoza).

[^10]: The Pietists understood this concept as the ‘original sin’.

[^11]: = A Jew from Fürth, with whom the missionary Widmann held long conversations at the beginning of that year (1732) and to whom he developed a friendly relationship.

[^12]: The episode with Mrs. Münchhausen, which took place in Hanover a short time before, could be found in the same diary AFSt/H K 57, folio 126 r(ecto).

[^13]: = A missionary tract, which was written by the Halle missionaries. The name *Yoreh Deah* [Teacher of Knowledge] is a reference to a medieval work by the Jewish scholar Jaacov ben Asher, and is (more importantly) being recognized as part of Joseph Karo's *Shulchan Aruch* (‫שולחן ערוך‬‎).

[^14]: Most probably, it was *Mikhtav Ahava* (**מכתב אהבה**), which is believed to have been written by Johannes Müller, the author of *Or Le'et Erev* (**אור לעת ערב**). See also Document 1, footnote No. 5.

[^15]: The Preface was an address to the Christian reader in Latin and would have immediately revealed the true character of the book.

[^16]: In a Yiddish translation.

[^17]: Malachi 3:23.

[^18]: The account of the second missionary was recorded in the form of a conversation: *Jew: I cannot believe that one can die before the others, it is also not written about your MASCHIACH as you said it. **It is against all reason!** These were the word the Jew said with great affectation. I: Look at the one who has our SCHALOM [= peace], he was not a RASCHA [= bad person] because he used no deceive, and this very SCHELOMENU [= our peace] is a cleansing for our sins. Jew: Indeed, **but that does not mean that he died for our sins**.  I: At v. 9 it says clearly CI NIOSAR MEEREZ CHAJIM = He was extirpated from the land of the living. That is a real death. And at v. 6 we read that he had been carrying all our sins and God (?) on him. MEDICCA MIPAESCHAENU [= healing from our sins] are big sins... Jew: If Jesus were the Messiah and the King, the entire world would have had to know that. You say, he was King, but others don’t; **who knows for sure how it actually was**. I: It was published in Es. C ii as God promised, he is pictured as a NES [= wonder] and the OMOS [= nations] understand that. He who is accepted by the OMOS is a declared Messiah, but he is granted no honour by the RESCHAIN [= the evil ones] and such are killed because they argue against Christianity. [...]  Jew: The GOMMORA [= section of the Talmud] doesn't say that he will be a King. I: A King is a MASCHIACH. Jew: I don't mean a king like all other kings of the world. I: You can see it in this chapter; divine things will be spoken of him. The heathen would ask him like a nation asks their God Es. ch. 8. He rules and judges according to his heart, not according to what he sees or hears. [...] Jew: **To believe all of this is not reasonable at all!** I: it seemed as if it would be against all reason, when Abraham needed to kill his son, from which a great people should be born. Jew: God tested him. I: Abraham didn't know that, and Isaac also believed it, and followed God's commanded to take wood to death and he let himself be bound, because God's word is to be believed, also over reason*. AFSt/H K 56, fol. 217v-r (emphases A.S.).

[^19]: AFSt/H K 56, fol. 219v.

[^20]: Ernst Christoph Hochmann von Hochenau (1670-1721) was considered a radical Pietist and cofounder of the separate community in Berleburg (Hesse).

[^21]: = The general conversion (of the hearts) of the Jews to Christ and Christianity.

[^22]: Also known as Radical Pietists, because they avoided the general church service and instead held private (edifying) congregations.

[^23]: This was an argument frequently used by the Pietists. According to them, only the Messiah could redeem mankind from their sins.

[^24]: The Author of the famous anti-Jewish polemical work „Judaism Unmasked“: JOHANN ANDREAS EISENMENGER: Entdecktes Judentum oder Gründlicher und wahrhaffter Bericht, welchergestalt die verstockten Juden die hochheilige Drey-Einigkeit, Gott Vater, Sohn und Heil. Geist erschrecklicher Weise lästern und verunehren, die Heil. Mutter Christi verschmähen, das Neue Testament, die Evangelisten und Aposteln, die Christliche Religion spöttisch durchziehen, und die gantze Christenheit auff das äusserste verachten und verfluchen [...] Frankfurt/Main 1700.

[^25]: It is not clear, what the missionary referred to here. It could be that he was talking about the followers of Shabbetai Zvi.

[^26]: See document 2, footnote No. 2.

[^27]: The Pietists referred to themselves as messianic, in order to emphasize the fact that they have already accepted the (true) Messiah.

[^28]: This was how the Jewish leaders in Frankfurt am Main were called.

[^29]: Philipp Jakob Spener (1635-1705), is considered to be the founder of German Pietism.

[^30]: Widmann meinte mit Meschamed zweifelsfrei Meschumad, d.h. ein Konvertit.

[^31]: Es kann nicht endgültig und zweifelsfrei geklärt werden, ob es um das große oder das kleine Sendeschreiben handelt. Das kleine, vermisste Sendeschreiben [beginnt mit den Worten: ‫אם על כל בני ישראל‬‎] erschien bereits 1729. Der große Sendeschreiben [meistens bekannt als ‫מכתב אהבה‬‎] ist vor dem 14. Januar 1732 erschienen. Beide Werke wurden von Johann Müller verfasst, bzw. werden ihm zugeschrieben.

[^32]: Ein weiterer Missionstraktat. Joannis Anastasii Freylinghausenii ‫דאש הערץ פון דען קינדרן צו‬‎ [...] ‫לב לב בנים על אבותם‬‎ [...] ‫אירן עלטרן וויידר גקרט‬‎.[...] Oratio de genuinis filiis Abrahami habita cum judaeus christianis sacris Initiaretur in vulgare Judaeorum idioma transferri curavit Jo. Henr. Callenberg, Halle 1731.

[^33]: ‎[...] ‫ספר מעשי השלוחים‬‎. [...] ‫דאש בוך פון דען גשיכטן דער שלוחים‬‎ [Acta Apostolorum in Germanicum Judaeorum idioma transferri curauit ediditque Io. Henr. Callenberg, Halle 1731.

[^34]: ‎‫אור לעת ערב‬‎ was war die bekannteste Missionsschrift der Pietisten aus Halle. ‫יוחנן קימחי‬‎(eigtl. Johann Müller): ‫להאיר עיני ישראל ויראו בנחמות ציון בשוב ה' ציון :אור לעת ערב.‬‎ Halle (Saale) 1728. In this case, it was probably the addition from 1732.

[^35]: ‎Es handelt sich entweder um ‫ספר עקרים ה"ה עקרי האמונה והתורה של עדת המשיחיים. דאס איזט טייטש דיא גרינדי פון דעם גלויבן און פון דער ערנונג פון דער גמיינדי דער משיחיים‬‎[...]. [Augustana confessio in germanicum Judaeorum idioma transferri curauit ediditque Io. Henr. Callenberg [...], Halle 1732, oder um die vermisste Schrift Caspar Calvörs: Judenkatechismus, das ist, kurtzer weg des lebens zu dem Meßia und heylande der welt, gezeiget dem hause Israel; den unbekehrten zur erleuchtung, den bekehrten zur stärckung: aufs neue mit einer vorrede herausgegeben von Johann Heinrich Callenberg, Halle 1732.

[^36]: Eigtl. ‫ספר חובות הלבבות‬‎ = „Pflichten des Herzens" von Bahya ibn Paquda, (ca. 1050-1120, Saragossa).

[^37]: Eigtl. die Fähigkeit zum Bösen. So übersetzten die Pietisten von Halle diesen Begriff ins Deutsch.

[^38]: = Ein Jude aus Fürth, mit dem der Missionar Widmann lange Gespräche zu Beginn des Jahres 1732 führte und eine freundschaftliche Beziehung entwickelte.

[^39]: Die Episode mit der Frau Münchhausen fand kurze Zeit davor in Hannover statt. Siehe darüber im gleichen Tagebuch, Bl. 126<sup>r</sup>.

[^40]: ‎= Eine Missionsschrift, welche die Missionare selbst verfasst haben. Der Name *Joreh Deah* [=Lehrer der Weisheit] ist eine Anspielung an einem Werk des mittelalterlichen jüdischen Gelehrten Jaacov ben Ascher und wird oft mit einem Teil des Werks von Josef Karo *Schulchan Aruch* (‫שולחן ערוך‬‎).

[^41]: ‎Wahrscheinlich handelt es sich um *Mikhtav Ahava* (‫מכתב אהבה‬‎), der vermutlich von Johann Müller, der Autor des *Or Le'et Erev* (‫אור לעת ערב‬‎), verfasst wurde. Siehe auch Dokument 1, Fußnote Nr. 5.

[^42]: Die Vorrede war eine Adressierung an den christlichen Leser auf Latein und hätte vermutlich den wahren Charakter des Buchs sofort verraten.

[^43]: In einer Jiddischen Übersetzung.

[^44]: Maleachi 3:23.

[^45]: Der Bericht des zweiten Missionars wurde in Form eines Dialogs wiedergegeben: *Jud: ich kan nicht glauben, daß einer vor den andern kan sterben, es ist auch nicht geschrieben wie ihr sagt, von eurem MASCHIACH. **ES ist wider alle Vernunfft**! Solches redte der Jud mit starcken affect. Ich: da sehet ja von einem, der unsern SCHALOM [=Frieden] auf sich habe, er ist kein RASCHA [=Böser] gewesen, weil er keine betrug in seinem Mund gehabt, und eben dieser, SCHELOMENU [=unser Frieden] ist medicca, um unserer Sunden wilen. Jud. Ja, **das heißt noch nicht, daß er um unserer Sunden willen gestorben seye**. Ich. P.9 stehet es klar CI NIOSAR MEEREZ CHAJIM = Er ist außerottet aus dem land der Lebendigen. Das ist ein wahrer todt. Und p. 6 lesen wir, daß er unsere aller Sünde getragen, und Gott auf ihn solche anlaußen(?) lassen. MEDICCA MIPAESCHAENU [=Heilung von unseren Sünden] sind große Sünden... Jud. Wann Jesus der Mesias und König wäre, so müßte er vor der gantzen welt publiciret worden seyn. Ewer sagt, Er seye König, der ander nein, **wer weiß da, was gewesen.** Ich. Er ist ja publicirt Es cii. So, wie es Gott verheißen, dann er stehet als ein NES [Wunder], und die OMOS [Nationen] verstehen es. Welchen die OMOS annehmen, der ist ein erklärter Meßias, aber es sind RESCHAIM [Bösen], die geben ihm die Ehre nicht, und solche werden getödtet, die streiten wider Christum. ... Jud. die GOMORRA [Teil des Talmuds] sagt nicht, daß er werde ein König seyn. Ich: Ein König ist MASCHIACH. Jud. Ich meine kein König, wie die Könige der Welt. Ich. Das könnet ihr auß diesem Capitel sehen, göttliche dinge werden von ihm ausgesprochen, die heyden sollen ihn fragen, wie ein Volck seinen Gott Es.c.8. Er richtet nach dem Herzen, nicht nach der Zeugen, hören oder sehen... und daß er publicirt seyn muß, könnet ihr darauß lernen, das land wird seyn voll erkäntnus des Herrn, die Rebellen sind wie Löwen, --- sie nehmen ihn eben nicht alle an, aber gleichwohl mußen sie ruhig sizen und können seine berg nicht verstohren... Jud. **das alles so zu glauben ist gar nicht vernünfftig!** Ich. Das scheint ja wider die vernunfft zu seyn wann Abraham seinen Sohn todten soll, in dem ein groß Volck sole gebohren werden. Jud. Gott hat ihn geprüfft. Ich. Das wußte Abraham nicht, Isaac glaubte, da ihm Gott befahl Holz zum todt zu tragen und ließe sich binden, da nun Gottes Wort da ist, muß man glauben über Vernunfft.* AFSt/H K 56, Bll. 217v-218r (Herv. A.S.).

[^46]: AFSt/H K 56, fol. 219 v.

[^47]: Ernst Christoph Hochmann von Hochenau (1670-1721), ein ‚Radikalpietist‘ und Mitbegründer der Separatisten-Gemeinde in Berleburg (Hessen).

[^48]: Die allgemeine (Herzens-)Bekehrung der Juden zu Jesus und dem Christentum.

[^49]: Auch als Radikalpietisten bekannt, weil sie sich von den allgemeinen Gottesdienste fern halten und stattdessen private (erbauliche) Versammlungen veranstalten.

[^50]: Dieses Argument brachten die Pietisten auch immer wieder vor. Deswegen ist der Messias nötig, der die Sünden der Menschen auf sich nimmt und sie dadurch erlöst. Ein wichtiges Argument für die Richtigkeit des Christentums.

[^51]: Gemeint ist der Verfasser des berühmten antijüdischen Werks „Entdecktes Judentum“. Siehe JOHANN ANDREAS EISENMENGER: Entdecktes Judentum oder Gründlicher und wahrhaffter Bericht, welchergestalt die verstockten Juden die hochheilige Drey-Einigkeit, Gott Vater, Sohn und Heil. Geist erschrecklicher Weise lästern und verunehren, die Heil. Mutter Christi verschmähen, das Neue Testament, die Evangelisten und Aposteln, die Christliche Religion spöttisch durchziehen, und die gantze Christenheit auff das äusserste verachten und verfluchen [...] Frankfurt/Main 1700.

[^52]: Es ist nicht klar, welches Werk die Missionare hier meinten. Vielleicht sprach er über die Anhänger Schabbetai Zwis.

[^53]: Siehe Dokument 2, Fußnote Nr. 2.

[^54]: Die Bezeichnung der ‚Messianischen‘ gaben sich die Pietisten selbst, um zu betonen, dass sie den (wahren) Messias bereits erkannt haben.

[^55]: Die jüdischen Vorsteher in Frankfurt hießen so.

[^56]: Philipp Jakob Spener (1635-1705), gilt als Begründer des Pietismus.