---
title: “March!” The Celebratory Procession of Prague Jewry in 1741
presenter: Michael Silber
institution: Hebrew University of Jerusalem
volume: 16
year: "2019"
slug: march-procession-prague
event:
  name: "Early Modern Workshop: Jewish History Resources"
  theme: Senses and Perceptions
---
## Introduction

In the spring of 1741, the Jews of Prague mounted a festive procession to celebrate the birth of the Habsburg crown prince, the future Emperor Joseph II. This was the third event of its kind in Prague: similar processions had taken place celebrating the birth of a crown prince in 1678 and 1716. Each event documented in detail the order of the march and a description of its participants, but not in equal measure.

A rhyming Yiddish description of the 1678 procession has survived only in German transcription in a hostile mocking pamphlet published in Leipzig. A Yiddish account of the 1716 event published in Vienna fared better. Although the original has been lost, it was faithfully rendered in both Yiddish and German translation by the Frankfurt antiquarian Johann Jacob Schudt who also added a useful running commentary peppered with some snide asides. It was published as an independent pamphlet in Frankfurt 1716 and once again the following year in the concluding section of the fourth volume of his *Jüdische Merckwürdigkeiten.* In both publications, a description in both Yiddish and German translation of a more modest procession in Frankfurt preceded the Prague account. In addition to a manuscript account, three more books were published in Prague in 1716, one in Hebrew type and two in German, all devoted exclusively to the local festivities. These have been subjected to extensive analysis by Rachel Greenblatt in three recent articles.[^1] We do not know just how extensive these celebrations were, whether other communities also mounted such processions. Here I add a previously unpublished account of the 1716 celebrations in the Bohemian community of Bidschow. (Text 4)

By contrast to the rich yield of publications of 1716 , no festival book of the 1741 Prague procession seems to have survived. To be sure, we do possess three different publications that provided similar descriptions of the participants though in varying detail. The earliest is a dispatch from Prague four days after the events that appeared in the Berlin newspaper *Vossische Zeitung.[^2]* Three years later, a history of Maria Theresa’s reign by Christoph Gottlieb Richter devoted chapters to the Prague processions of non-Jews and Jews.[^3] This most detailed account was edited and translated into Yiddish in 1930 by Rudolf Glanz who also added a Yiddish translation of the *Vossische Zeitung*.[^4] A third version of the procession was copied into one of his manuscripts by the eighteenth century Bohemian scholar, Jan Karl Aloise Rohn (1711-1779), which then became the basis of two short articles by the Czech historian Antonín Dolenský, one of which was then translated into German and English by Wilma Iggers.[^5]

We can perhaps view as one more version the key at the bottom of the copper engraving of the serpentine procession that identifies the numbered participants.[^6] Indeed, rather than the written text, it is this impressive visual testimony that has made the 1741 pageantry justifiably famous. (See text 1a) To be sure, the 1716 procession was also depicted by two illustrations: in the frontispiece of Schudt’s pamphlet and in a folded leaf of one of the festival books. (1b and 1c) But these were rather schematic and dwarfed by the much larger and more realistic portrayal by the 1741 engraving. It has been reproduced often, most interestingly on a souvenir sheet issued by the Israeli postal service in 1960 where the embedded stamp shows the postal rider who leads the march.[^7] Significantly, the long title of the engraving notes that the Prague Primator, Simon Frankel, had it printed “pro Memoria” at his own expense. In this, he may have very well been following the example of his predecessor, the Primator of 1716, Samuel Sachsel Tausik, who had taken a similar initiative and commissioned one of the festival books (and perhaps his predecessor, Haim Lichtenstadt, the Primator in 1678, had done so as well). We may be certain that the earlier publications commemorating past processions served as a useful blueprint in 1741.

But the 1741 inscription, “Freüdens bezeügung von der Pragerischen Judenschafft den 24. April A°. 1741 gehalten worden/ Welches der Primator Simon Frankel, pro Memoria auf seine aigene Spesen in druckh verfassen Lassen”, could possibly refer not only to the engraving, but also to a printed text. None of the aforementioned descriptions of the procession made the claim that it had been sponsored by the Primator, and no such booklet has yet been found. However, recently I came across a previously unnoticed text, much more detailed than previous accounts, that did indeed bear the official authorization of the Primator Frankel who “was most zealous that these solemn events be recorded and ready within seven days.” (Text 2) It had appeared in a short-lived German language Jewish weekly, *Deborah (Die Biene). Ein Volksblatt zur Belehrung und Unterhaltung für Israeliten* published in Vienna and edited by Isaak Bloch in the 1860s. As far as I can tell, it has never since been cited and were it not for the ambitious digitization project at the Austrian National Library and Google, it may have remained condemned to obscurity.[^8] The anonymous author of the article, presumably the editor Bloch, provides the provenance of the text: “Dr. Jellinek was kind enough to give us the following curiosity from his richly furnished library, and we are glad to present the same linguistic and orthographic text to our esteemed readers..." The article does not spell out in what form the text was published—a large broadside, perhaps the size of the engraving, or more likely, a booklet.[^9] Were they published simultaneously, perhaps even bound together (while the copy at the Israel Museum seems once to have been folded, the one in the Prague Jewish Museum has no such traces)? And if not, which appeared first and perhaps even contributed to the preparation of the other? The illustration faithfully reproduces the order of the thirty-two sections of the procession as listed in the text and, one can of course say, vice versa. The only difference being that at times the number of participants depicted in the illustration are per force fewer than that mentioned in the text, being constrained by the dimensions of the engraving.

The various sections of the serpentine procession replicate almost exactly the earlier processions—community notables, scholars, students, professionals, guildsmen, entertainers, many in costume, mostly on foot, though quite a number mounted on horseback. Some of the props such as Bacchus on a barrel are clearly recycled, while certain roles are handed down within the family such as the acrobatic dancers (Isserles), medical doctors (Gumpertz) and apothecaries (Jeitteles). There are even instances where some also participated in the previous procession, such as the cantor Sinai Klauber. Thus tradition and memory play a key role in the celebrations.

One striking difference, though, is the different order of the sections in the 1741 procession. Whereas earlier processions set a carnival mood from the very beginning, warming up the crowd of spectators by having in the lead clowns, dwarfs, men on stilts, Moors, dancing cross dressers, musicians and the like, and the heads of the community appearing only toward the middle, in 1741 a somewhat more dignified ambience is created by having the Primator and his deputy at the very front, while relegating the ribald sections to the tail end of the snaking parade. (Perhaps this more subdued mood was the result of the ongoing War of Austrian Succession, with the spring of 1741 marking but a hiatus before fighting was to resume in the fall. By contrast, the earlier procession had taken place just after the decade and a half of the War of Spanish Succession had more or less come to an end. But all this is just speculation.)

The print, with its grand size and graphic artistry, is unique in offering a visual representation of an entire Jewish community. One is hard pressed to find a similar depiction of a Jewish collective even in the following century. We may note, however, that not everyone appears in the illustration. Absent are the spectators, not only Jews but also non-Jewish dignitaries as we learn from the text. It is also quite understandable that during celebrations of new birth, the most prestigious society in the community, the *hevra kadisha*, with its association with sickness and death, makes no appearance in the procession and consequently in the print. Perhaps the famous cycle of paintings of its activities composed in the next generation come as compensation. Most surprising, in light of the two dozen or so participants that are specifically named, is that the most famous Jewish scholar of Prague, the foremost head of yeshiva of his generation, the charismatic Rabbi Jonathan Eibeschütz is missing both from the text and the illustration. He will be invited to assume the post of the Metz rabbinate in the months to come, but will linger on in Prague until the following year. And last, of course, the absence of women. One could argue that it was only to be expected, were it not for the presence of a number of young women in a previous procession. Forty-third in the 1678 parade was “Isaac Mahler’s daughter playing an instrument, two girls with citrons, two youths dressed as girls with fiddles.” Immediately following was the step-daughter of the Primator Haim Lichtenstadt dressed as a young man, as a page.

The text adds information that the engraving does not or could not contain. The deliberations leading to the procession; the celebrations that took place a month earlier immediately after the news of the birth became known; the route taken by the parade. (See the maps in 2) The illumination and decoration of the houses and other preparations along with the songs and benedictions showered on the newborn prince.

Most important however, is that the text transforms the black and white engraving into technicolor and adds to its sensual pleasure. It goes into unusual detail of the dress of the each of the participants, noting in particular the different fabrics, the decorations on the clothing and their colors. Some of the attire is personal such as the *kittels*, Sabbath synagogue capes and hats, others are clearly rented for the occasion like the hussar uniforms. These costumes could be borrowed from the local garrison, along with a variety of arms; others such as the fancy dress of the yeshiva *bahurim* may have been ready made by the tailors guild for the students of the nearby university. Horses were rented from the nearby riding school or perhaps once again from the army garrison.

The rich clothing with its variety of colors went against the grain of widely accepted perceptions of Jewish costume in the eighteenth century. The sumptuary regulation issued in Frankfurt in 1715 allowed only one color for clothing, exceptionally, two.[^10] “Nowadays the Jews in Germany wear black cloaks, black hats and clothes commonly of dark colors,” wrote a Swiss cleric. “I do not remember ever to have seen a Jew in scarlet, green or sky blue or similar colors but I saw many dressed in black damask.”[^11] Another observer in Fürth declared that “nowadays, it is the black color that is most favored by Jewish people.”[^12] As for Prague, the Bohemian governor reported in 1746 that the Jews “manage with little and are frugal in eating and drinking and are used to wearing very shabby clothing.”[^13]

The finery on display, like every other aspect of the procession was orchestrated by the Primator Simon Wolf Frankel. A scion of the most prominent families of Prague, Frankel was by all accounts a wealthy, proud and vain man. During the celebrations, he engaged in acts of conspicuous philanthropy, distributing alms in the synagogue in return for saying psalms; sending food and drink to prisoners; outfitting the orphans and poor children of his charitable school to take part in the procession; entertaining high born non-Jewish guests in his house at the conclusion of the day. It was Frankel who shouldered the cost of the procession as well as its commemoration in text and engraving.

Such elite philanthropy could easily engender resentment. Later it was said that when Prague Jewry was beset with plunder and ordered expelled a few years later, the blame for the misfortunes was placed on the Primator and his reckless, conspicuous display of wealth in public during the festive procession. The anger and hatred he encountered proved too much; he died a few weeks after the expulsion decree was issued, on January 8 1745, the Hebrew year *be-gerush*.[^14]

No doubt some concluded that not only the character of the Primator was to be blamed for the misfortunes that befell Prague Jewry, but also the arrogant indulgence in colors and finery by willing participants in the celebrations was to be faulted. Perhaps it was this cautionary tale that prompted the puritanical sumptuary regulation instituted in Prague the following generation which warned that “the wearing of silk scarves, ribbons, waistcoats, dresses, and powdered wigs is not allowed.”[^15]

## Source 1 Translation

## Source 1 Original Text

Footnotes

[^1]: Rachel Greenblatt, “On Jewish Prague in the Age of Schudt’s Frankfurt: Two Jewish Towns in Celebration on the Birth of an Heir to the Habsburg Throne (1716),” *Frankfurter Judaistische Beiträge* (Frankfurt, 2015), pp. 239-257; idem, “Jewish Festive Processions in Central Europe and their Depiction in Print (1716 und 1741)” (in Hebrew), *Picturing the Past: Essays in Honor of Richard I. Cohen*, edited by Ezra Mendelsohn, co-edited by Eli Lederhendler (Jerusalem, 2017), pp. 247-271; idem, “A Jewish Easter Lamb: Cultural Connections and its Limits in a 1716 Prague Procession,” *Connecting Histories: Jews and Their Others in Early Modern Europe*, edited by Francesca Bregoli and David B. Ruderman (Philadelphia, 2019), pp. 154-171, 275-279.

[^2]: The Prague dispatch was dated 26 April 1741 and appeared in the 25 May 1741 issue of the *Vossischen Zeitung*. Reproduced by Ludwig Geiger, “Mittheilungen aus Berliner Zeitungen, Zeitschriften und Brochüren (1741-1830),” *ZGJD* 4 (1890), 289-291.  
[^3]: “Freudens Bezeugungen die deshalb zu Prag angestellet worden,” and “Beschreibung des Auszugs, den die Juden in Prag deswegen gehalten,” in [Christoph Gottlieb Richter], *Geschichte und Thaten der allerdurchlauchtigsten und großmächtigsten Fürstin und Frau MARIA THERESIA jetzregierenden Königin in Hungarn und Böheim* (np. 1743), pp. 144-153 and 153-160.

[^4]: Rudolf Glanz, “A barikht fun a ben-dor vegn der fayerlikher protsesie fun di proger yidn dem 24sten April 1741,"in *Arkhiv far der geshikhte fun yidishn teater un drame*, ed. Jacob Shatzky, vol. 1 (Vilna and New York, 1930), pp. 77-84.  
[^5]: The reference to Jan Karl Aloise Rohn’s manuscript “Memorabilia,” is given by Antonín Dolenský, “Průvod pražských židů na počest narození císaře Josefa II.,” *Český lid* XIX (1910), 131-133, here 131, n. This footnote is missing from an almost identical article published a year earlier, idem, “Slavnostní průvod pražských židů r. 1741,” *Kalendar cesko-zidovský* XXIX (1909), 119-121, which is the source for Wilma Iggers, ed., *Die Juden in Böhmen und Mähren: Ein historisches Lesebuch* (München, 1986), pp. 27-29 and idem, *The Jews of Bohemia and Moravia: A Historical Reader* (Detroit, 1992), pp. 29-31. See Milan Svoboda, “Jan Karel Rohn: historik, jazykozpytec a liberecký patriot doby barokní [Historian, Linguist and Liberec Patriot of the Baroque Period],” in: *Problematika historických a vzácných knižních fondů Čech, Moravy a Slezska* (Brno, 2005), pp. 195-210.

[^6]: An English translation appears with a reproduction of the engraving in Alfred Rubens, *A History of Jewish Costume* (London, 1973), p. 134. The engraving also served as an inner “wrapper”of the book.

[^7]: It is accessible online: [https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Stamps_of_Israel_-_Souvenir_Sheet_-_Taviv.jpg](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Stamps_of_Israel_-_Souvenir_Sheet_-_Taviv.jpg)

[^8]: "Ein Curiosum aus dem Jahre 1741," *Deborah* II (Prague, 1866), 54-55, 66-67. I referred to it previously in “Once Were Warriors: Visual Representation of Jews and the Military in the Early Modern Period” (in Hebrew), *Picturing the Past: Essays in Honor of Richard I. Cohen*, edited by Ezra Mendelsohn, co-edited by Eli Lederhendler (Jerusalem, 2017), pp. 121-140 and “The Making of Habsburg Jewry in the Long Eighteenth Century,” *Cambridge History of Judaism: vol. VII The Early Modern World, 1500-1815*, edited by Jonathan Karp and Adam Sutcliffe (Cambridge, 2017), ch. 29, pp. 763-797.

[^9]: Although Otto Muneles, *Bibliographical Survey of Jewish Prague* (Prague, 1952) does not list “Ein Curiousm,”, nor for that matter the other sources of the procession mentioned above with the exception of Dolenský’s first article, nevertheless, quite surprisingly, he does provide the exact title of the publication reproduced in *Deborah* on p. 75 of his survey, under item 249*.* Had he seen the original publication or a reference to it? But what is still puzzling is that in his list of the illustrations (p. 560), he erroneously links the title of item 249 to the engraving, which has a quite different name.

[^10]: Johann Jacob Schudt, *Neue Franckfurter Jüdische Kleider-Ordnung* (Frankfurt am Main, 1716), p. 96.

[^11]: Johann Caspar Ulrichs, “Kleider der Juden,” S*ammlung Jüdischer Geschichten ... in der Schweiz*, (Basel, 1768), pp. 49-53 cited by Rubens, *Jewish Costume*, p. 121.  
[^12]: [Andreas Wurfel], *Historische Nachricht von der Judengemeinde in dem Hofmarkt Fürth* (Frankfurt und Prag, 1754), pp. 153-154.  
[^13]: Bohemian Statthalterei’s report of 5 April 1746, cited in Israel Taglicht, ed., *Nachlässe der Wiener Juden im 17. und 18. Jahrhundert: Ein Beitrag zur Finanz-, Wirtschafts- und Familiengeschichte des 17. und 18. Jahrhunderts* (Wien und Leipzig, 1917), p. 3.

[^14]: He was buried in Prague. Marcus Brann, “Die Grabschriften der Familie Fränkel-Spira in Prag,” *MGWJ* 46 (1902), 450-473, 556-560, here 469-470. David J. Podiebrad, “Grab des Primators Simon Wolf Frankl Spiro” in his *Alterthümer der Prager Josefstadt, israelitischer Friedhof, Alt-Neu-Schule und andere Synagoge*n, 3rd edition (Prag, 1870), pp. 80-91 is the main source for the characterization of the man and the resentment he generated. It was immediately picked up by Marcus Lehmann in a chapter of his serialized novel, *Zur rechten Zeit*, in *Der Israelit*, 30.08.1871, p. 661.

[^15]: “Ein Anti-Luxusgesetz der Prager Judengemeinde," in *Das Abendland. Central-Organ für alle zeitgemässen Interessen des Judenthums* IV (1867), 137-139. English translation from Iggers, *Jews of Bohemia and Moravia*, p. 48.