---
title: The Execution of Frantz Ferdinand Engelberger
presenter: Yaacov Deutsch
institution: David Yellin College
volume: 16
year: "2019"
slug: execution-frantz-engelberger
event:
  name: "Early Modern Workshop: Jewish History Resources"
  theme: Senses and Perceptions
language:
  - German
description: The document presented here is a broadsheet from 1642 that
  describes the execution of Frantz Ferdinand Engelberger, a Jew killed after an
  illustrious history of crime and religious polemic. Engelberger converted to
  Christianity after he was caught stealing from a synagogue around 1636. He
  subsequently published two anti-Jewish texts (1640), became known to the
  emperor Ferdinand III and two years later was caught stealing an expensive
  vessel from the court’s treasury along with two Jews. All three thieves were
  sentenced to death. The text reports the events that followed their sentence
  starting with the original day of execution when Engelsberger denounced
  Christianity, and focusing on what happened to him four days later after he
  was convicted as a blasphemer, and sentenced to torture and a very cruel
  death.
---
## Introduction

*Eine sehr denckwürdige Historia/ Von einem getaufften/ doch wider vom Christenthumb ab gefallenen Juden/ welcher wegen Diebstal sampt zweyen andern Juden in Wien ergriffen/ vnd justificirt worden*, Wien, 1642

The document presented here is a broadsheet from 1642 that describes the execution of Frantz Ferdinand Engelberger, a Jew killed after an illustrious history of crime and religious polemic. Engelberger converted to Christianity after he was caught stealing from a synagogue around 1636. He subsequently published two anti-Jewish texts (1640), became known to the emperor Ferdinand III and two years later was caught stealing an expensive vessel from the court’s treasury along with two Jews. All three thieves were sentenced to death. The text reports the events that followed their sentence starting with the original day of execution when Engelsberger denounced

Christianity, and focusing on what happened to him four days later after he was convicted as a blasphemer, and sentenced to torture and a very cruel death.  
The text highlights multiple senses involved in this spectacle/theatre of pain; the text and image were meant to stimulate the senses of the readers or

viewers. Seeing the different stages of the execution is one aspect, but other senses were also important. Noises played a major part in the execution, the cries of the culprit and the crowd as well as the blazing fire. Smell was also invoked as Engelberger’s body was burnt at the end of the process. Finally, the torture described stimulated tactile reactions. The source raises questions about the connection between the text and the image, and whether the ways they stimulate the senses of the reader/viewer complement or contradict each other.

How were early modern executions structured and how were they used to evoke the senses of the spectators? How did those who attended perceive these spectacles? The case of Engelsberger should be understood in the broader context in which this affair is situated—the history of early modern executions.

**Selected Bibliography**

*Austria Judaica. Quellen zur Geschichte der Juden in Niederösterreich und Wien 1496–1671*. Bearbeitet von Peter Rauscher unter Mitarbeit von Barbara Staudinger. (Quelleneditionen des Instituts für Österreichische Geschichtsforschung, Bd. 7.) Wien/München: Böhlau/Oldenbourg, 2011, pp. 368-373.

Gutsche Victoria Luise, *Zwischen Abgrenzung und Annäherung: Konstruktionen des Jüdischen in der Literatur des 17. Jahrhunderts*. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2017, pp. 99-122.

Kaufmann David, *Die letzte Vertreibung der Juden aus Wien und Niederösterreich: ihre Vorgeschichte (1625-1670) und ihre Opfer*. Wien: C. Konegen, 1889, pp. 36-38.

## Source 1 Translation

**A most memorable history of a baptized Jew, though fallen from the Christian** faith **who was arrested and brought to justice with two other Jews because of theft.**

On the (12) 22 of August in the year 1642, three of the most noble Jews (one of whom used to be a very famous Rabbi and Jewish High Priest, who was baptized many years ago in Rackowitz in Poland, and was named Ferdinand Franz Engelberger, who during the time he pretended to be a Christian, had written against the Jews and printed several books, in which he condemned all Jews alive to the hellfire of the devil) were hung in the Imperial Residence City of Vienna by their thieving necks, because of theft committed over many years during the times they were Christians as well as Jews. The baptized rabbi had expertly contributed [to these thefts] with help and advice, especially by giving the other two opportunity and knowledge how to break into the treasure chamber of His (Royal) Serene Highness the Archduke of Austria, and they snuck in with theft keys and similar devices, well known to the Jews, which they did for considerable time and with their thieving fingers stealing [valuables] worth many thousand Thaler.

But God the Almighty did not want to allow that such a notorious thief should end his ungodly life under the title and name of a Christian, and particularly so that the other Jews couldn’t say that as soon as he became a Christian, he also became a thief. Therefore, when the same three Jews were put to trial (for capital crimes) as public thieves on the said Friday, it happened that this baptized Rabbi had reckoned and hoped that his life, as a baptized Jew who had become a Christian, would be spared. He pretended to be as pious and devout, kissed the crucifix in his hands many times and hit himself on his chest in great piety und said frequently: Oh my dear LORD Jesus, be gracious and have mercy with me this time. However, his hope and expectation didn’t come to pass and the verdict against all three of them was was publicly read out, that they – as public thieves – were sentenced to death by hanging.

When the Rabbi heard that he had been sentenced to die on the gallows, he threw the crucifix to the ground (1) with great fierceness and wrath, spat on it, jumped on it with both feet like a frantic and furious dog, swore, raged and cursed, because he was going to die by a Christian verdict, and he wanted to die as a proper Jew and not a Christian. And even if he had to descend alive straight to the deepest abyss of hell to Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, he did not want to grant the Christians the honor to die as a Christian thief. He publicly denounced his Christian faith, which he had pretended to keep until then and then disowned the Christian faith, and spouted outrageous ferocious heresy against God and all baptized Christians.

The Jesuit priest who had been there (to provide spiritual assistant) and the city judge exhorted him to [to think about] what he was doing, because only the day before he had received the holy sacrament but he replied defiantly: No, not at all. He had not received anything, but rather spat out the sacrament out of his mouth into a handkerchief or wiping towel, wrapped it into it, and announced with reverence that he threw it into the toilet in the district offices, where has was kept prisoner. If they searched there, they would find it. Indeed, this was done and the (communion) host was found there in the in the most disgusting filth with the towel.

The Jesuit Father, appalled by the devilish godlessness of this Jew, said in fierceness and fervor: no wonder that people beat (all) Jews and stamp on them! This [comment] incited (the people standing) in front of the city court (called „the Schrannen‟) and they violently attacked many Jews and even knocked some of them down, so that they came to lie next to the thieves. and quite a few of their shops were also plundered by the common people.

When His Imperial Majesty was notified about these events, he got upset and angry and commanded that the two thieves be hung according to the verdict (2), but that the third arch thief and villain, the Samaritan Rabbi, should be brought back to the district offices. This did indeed happen but it could be done only in the night because of the rage and threat of violence of common people.

The following Saturday, which was the Holy Sabbath of the Jews, the Rabbi was again brought out and interrogated why he had treated the crucifix so appallingly yesterday, and why he had spouted out such blasphemous speech, although he had been baptized as a Christian and written against Judaism. Upon which he replied with defiant and unrepentant words:

He had done so in eternal glory and praise for the Jews, and in eternal derision and mockery for the Christians, partly intentionally, partly only in pretense, but hereby he wished to publicly admit it and refuse [Christian teachings]. While a Christian he also never consumed the sacrament, but always took it out of his mouth and threw it in a secret chamber [=lavatory]. He despised the sacrament as dangerous and condemned even more than Jews despised pork. All I all, he expressed such dreadful blasphemy, which cannot be uttered or described, because one would worry the Earth would burst open in order to devour the blasphemer alive.

Therefore. the godless and wicked villain was taken away and led him again to the „Schrannen‟ [city court building] while the other Jews performed their idolatry. He

was told the new verdict, which was soon executed and completed in the following way.

First he – as an obvious blasphemer and injurer of the highest Divine Majesty – was set on a high carriage, led with great pomp to all four main squares of the Imperial Residence City Vienna – first to the Hoher Markt (High Market), then to the Hof, thirdly to the Graben and fourthly to the Neuer Markt (New Market). At the first location he was right chest was ripped with scorching hot pliers (3) several times. At the second location, a strap (4) from his neck down to his back was cut and ripped out of his body. At the third location, he was pinched again with burning pliers several times on the left side of chest, and at the fourth [square] a strap [of flesh] was cut again in a similar manner and flayed. Hereafter he was taken down from the high carriage, fettered on a board (5) where he horribly screamed bloody murder „O God Adonai, who art never born, have mercy upon me [et cetera]‟ and was dragged to the scaffold. There his blasphemous tongue (6), which was already coal-black, was cut out, thereupon his right hand (7) being that of a perjurer and baptism fraudster was chopped off with an ax, thereafter he – as an arch thief – was hung by his feet in chains, and finally he – as a bedeviled Jew and apostate and renegade Christian – (8) was roasted alive and burned together with the gallows, and he expired in his confounded stubbornness against all admonitions.

God shall have mercy on the infidels and convert them all to the truth, for the sake of Christ, Amen.

## Source 1 Original Text

Den (12) 22 Augusti/ 1642. Jahrs/ hat man in Wien/der Kais. Residentz Stadt drey der vornembsten Juden (darunter einer hiebevor ein sehr berühmter Rabbi und Jüdisch Hoher Priester gewesen/ und sich vor etlich Jahren zu Rackowitz in Polen tauffen lassen/ und Ferdinand Frantz Engelberger genannt worden/ welcher Zeit seines gewehrten falschen Christenthumbs wider die Juden geschrieben/ und etlich Bücher in Truck außgehen lassen/ in welchen er all Juden/ als lebendige Höllenbränd/ dem Teuffel zu eygen übergeben) wegen verübten/ und lange Jahr über/ so wol im Christen: als auch im Judenthumb getriebenen Diebstals halben/ zu welchem dann der getauffte Rabbi meisterlich mit Raht und That geholffen/ insonderheit aber den andern zweyen Gelegenheit und Anschläg an die Hand gegeben/ in Ihrer Hochfürstl. Durchl. Ertz Hertzog zu Oesterreich Schatzkammer/ vermittels gebrauchter Gewöhnlicher Diebsschlüssel/ und anderer dergleichen/ ihnen Juden wolbekannter Instrumenten/ und diebischer Handgriff/ einzuschleichen/ wie sie dann solches ein geraume Zeit über practiciret/ und etlich viel tausend Thaler werth darauß gestolen/ an ihre diebische Hälß hencken sollen. Weiln aber GOtt der Allmächtige nicht zulassen noch verhengen wollen/ daß ein solcher Ertzdieb unter dem Titul und Namen eines Christen sein Gottloses Leben enden solte sintemal die andern Juden hetten sagen mögen/ so bald er were ein Christ worden/ were er auch zugleich ein Dieb worden. So hat sichs zugetragen/ als man berürten Freytags selbige drey Juden/ als offentliche Dieb/ vor peinlich Halßgericht gestellt/ dieser getauffte Rabbi vermeyn/ und gehofft gehabt/ man würde seiner/ als eines getaufften Juden zu Christen/ an dem Leben verschonen/ wie er sich dann andächtig und heilig gestellet/ und das Crucifix so er in Händen gehabt vielfältig geküsset/ und mit grosser Andacht auff die Brust geschlagen/ und zum öfftern gesagt: Ach mein lieber HERR Jesu/ sey mit doch auff dißmal gnädig und barmhertzig. So ist aber jedoch ein solches seiner Hoffnung und Meynung nach nicht erfolgt/ sondern das Urtheil wider sie alle drey dieses Inhalts eröffnet und abgelesen worden/ daß sie/ als offentliche Dieb mit dem Strang vom Leben zum Todt gerichtet werden solten. Als solches der Rabbi gehöret/ daß er an den Galgen gehenckt werden und sterben solte/ hat er in grossem Grimm und Zorn das

Crucifix zu boden geworffen/ (1) dasselbe angespeyet/ darnach mit beyden Füssen wie ein rasender und wütender Hund/ darauff gesprungen/ geflucht getobt und gelästert/ mit vermelden/ weiln er ja sehe/ daß er durch der Christen Urtheil sterben müste/ so wolte er sterben als ein rechter Jud/ und nicht als ein Christ und solte er gleich lebendig in den untersten Abgrund der Höllen zu Korah/ Dathan und Abiran fahren/ wolte den Christen nicht so viel Ehr anthun/ daß er als ein Christendieb sterben solte/ wie er dann alsobald das Christenthumb/ so er biß dahero in dem schein geführet/ und damit zugleich den Christlichen Glauben verläugnet/ demselben öffentlich abgesagt/ und unerhörte grausame Lästerung wider GOtt und alle getauffte Christen außgegossen.

Ob nun wol der zugegebne *Pater Societatis Jesu*, und Herr StadtRichter ihme beweglich zugesprochen/ was er thäthe/ er hette ja allererst den Tag zuvor das hochwürdige Sacrament empfangen/ so hat er trotziglich darauff geantwortet/ Nein/ keines wegs/ er habe nichts empfangen/ sondern habe das Sacrament wider auß dem Mund in ein Fascinetlein oder Wischtuch gespeyet/ darein gewickelt/ und mit Reverentz zu melden/ in ein heimlich Gemach in dem Ampthauß/ wo er gefangen gesessen/ geworffen/ allda solte mans suchen/ so würde mans finden/ wie dann auch geschehen/ und die Hostia sampt dem Wischtuch daselbst in dem allergarstigsten Unflat gefunden worden: Uber welcher verteuffelten Gottlosigkeit dieses Juden sich männiglich entsetzet/ der *Pater* Jesuit aber im Grimm und Eyfer gesagt: Es were kein Wunder/ daß man die Juden alle zu boden schlüg/ und mit Füssen trette: Worüber dann so gleich ein grosser Tumult vor dem Rahthauß/ oder der Schrannen entstanden/ und viel Juden mit rauffen schändlich tractiert/ ja theils gar zu boden geschlagen worden/ daß sie neben den Dieben gelegen/ wie dann auch etlichen ihre Gewölber von dem gemeinen Volck geplündert worden.

Als solches Ihrer Käys. Majest. *notificirt* worden/ haben sich dieselbe sehr darüber alterirt und entsetzt/ dabeneben allergnädigst befohlen/ daß man die zween Dieb zwar der Urtheil gemeß/ hencken (2) den dritten Ertzdieb und Bößwicht aber/ als den Samaritischen Rabbi wider in das Ampthauß führen solte/ wie dann auch jenes zwar beschehen/ dieses aber wegen deß erzörnten und ergrimmten gemeinen Volcks eher nicht als bey eingetrettner Nacht zu Werck gerichtet werden können.

Deß nachfolgeten Sonnabend/ welcher der der Juden heiliger Sabbath war/ wurde der Rabbi widerumb hervor geführt und examinirt/ warumb er mit dem Crucifix gestern so erschröcklich umbgangen/ und solche Gottslästerliche Reden außgegossen/ da er doch zuvor sich zu einem Christen tauffen lassen und wider das Judenthumb geschrieben hette? Darauff hat er mit trotzigen und halßstarrigen Worten geantwortet/ das habe er den Juden zum ewigen Ruhm und Preiß/ den Christen aber zu ewigem Spott und Schand gethan/ alles theils mit fleiß/ theils nur zum Schein von ihm geschehen/ welches er aber hiermit öffentlich bekannt/ und zugleich widersprochen haben wolte/ hette auch in seinem Christenthumb/ das

Sacrament nie genossen/ sondern allezeit wider auß dem Mund genommen/ in ein heimlich Gemach geworffen/ und seye das Sacrament jederzeit bey ihm vor schädlicher und verdampter / als bey den Juden das Schweinenfleisch gehalten worden. In Summa/ er hat solche grewliche Gottslästerung außgegossen/ welche weder außzusprechen/ noch zu beschreiben seyn/ dahero man dann besorgt hat/ es möchte sich die Erde auffthun/ und den Gottslästerer lebendig verschlingen.

Derhalben ist man mit dem gottlosen und verruchten Bößwicht fortgefahren/ denselben wider auff die Schrannen geführt/ eben umb die Zeit/ da die andere Juden ihre Abgötterey verrichtet/ und ihme ein ander Urtheil vorgelesen/ welches auch alsobald an ihm folgender Gestalt exequirt und vollzogen worden.

Erstlich ist er/ als ein offenbarer Gottslästerer und Verletzer der höchsten Göttlichen Majestät/ auff einem hohen Wagen/ gesetzt, inn solchem Pomp auff alle vier Hauptplätz der Käys. Residentz Stadt Wien/ als erstlich auff den Hohenmarck/ zum andern auff den Hof/ zum dritten auff den Graben/ und zum vierdten auff den newen Marckt geführet/ und auff dem ersten mit glüenden Zangen (3) in die rechte Brust etlichmal gerissen/ auff dem andern ein Riemen (4) vom Halß an/ über den Ruck auß dem Leib geschnitten und gerissen/ auff dem dritten/ widerumm mit glüenden Zangen in die lincke Brust etlichmal gezwickt/ auff dem vierdten abermaln ein Riemen auff vorige Manier geschnidten und abgezogen/ hernacher von dem hohen Wagen herab genommen/ auff eine Schleiffe gebunden (5) da er grausamlich Zetter und Mordio geschryen/ O Gott Adonay/ der du nie geborn bist/ erbarm dich meiner/ ec. und biß an die Richtstatt geschleifft/ daselbst ihm die Gottslästerliche Zunge/ (6) welche allbereit kohlschwartz gewesen/ herauß geschnidten/ darauff die rechte Hand (7) ihm/ als einen Tauff- und Eydbrüchigen/ mit einem Beihel abgehauen/ hernacher aber als ein Ertzdieb bey den Füssen an Ketten auffgehenckt/ und endlich als ein verteuffelter Jud/ und abgefallner verlangneter Christ (8) lebendig gebraten/ und mit dem Galgen verbrennt worden/ und in seiner vermaledeyten Verstockung also wider alle Vermahnung dahin gefahren.

Gott wolle sich der Unglaubigen in Gnaden erbarmen und sie alle bekehren/ zu der Warheit, umb Christ willen/ Amen.