---
title: "Two Cases of Apostasy in Dubno in 1716: Jews, Christians, and Family Life"
author: Magda Teter
institution: Wesleyan University
volume: 3
year: "2006"
slug: two-cases-apostasy-dubno
event:
  name: "Early Modern Workshop: Jewish History Resources"
  theme: Gender, Family, and Social Structures
language:
  - Polish
publication_location:
  - Dubno
description: >-
  This text relates a trial of two Christian women who accepted to Judaism that
  took place in the city of Dubno in eastern Poland in 1716. The text presented
  here comes from a collection of primary sources published in Kiev \[now Kyiv\]
  in 1869, as part of effort by scholars at the time to collect and publish
  primary source materials about Ukraine. The collection is called Arkhiv
  Iugo-zapadnoi Rossii, or The Archive of SouthWestern Russia, and contains
  documents from the South-Western part of Ukraine.


  This presentation is for the following text(s): Two Cases of Apostasy in Dubno
  in 1716
---
## Source 1 Introduction

This text relates a trial of two Christian women who accepted to Judaism that took place in the city of Dubno in eastern Poland in 1716.

The text presented here comes from a collection of primary sources published in Kiev \[now Kyiv\] in 1869, as part of effort by scholars at the time to collect and publish primary source materials about Ukraine. The collection is called _Arkhiv Iugo-zapadnoi Rossii_, or The Archive of South-Western Russia, and contains documents from the South-Western part of Ukraine.

The specific document comes from the court of the town of Dubno in Volhynia, near two major towns at the time, Łuck and Krzemieniec. Dubno was a private town in Poland- Lithuania. In 1498 its owner at the time, Duke Konstanty Ostrogski received a privilege from the Grand Duke of Lithuania Alexander to raise the settlement to the status of a town. From 1507 it was governed by the Magdeburg Law. In 1609 a line of succession is established by Janusz Ostrogski, in case he or his descendants died without heirs. In such case the town was to be inherited by the Zasławski family, which indeed happened in 1619. In 1673 Dubno was turned into the hands of the Lubomirski family, then the Sanguszko family, and in 1753 back into the Lubomirskis’ hands.

As it is typical for Poland, apostasy cases were tried by the magistrate not Church courts. The penalty for apostasy was burning at the stake, which for heresy death by sword. The defiant Maryna Dawidowa, who insisted on remaining in Judaism, was burned alive at the stake. Whereas the contrite Maryna Wojciechówna received a hybrid penalty, as a heretic—death by sword, and an apostasy –burning at the stake. Although the Magdeburg law, based on the _Speculum Saxonum_, specified that a repentant heretic or apostate should be given a chance of reconciliation, and should be executed only after a relapse, as it is specified by Canon law as well, here, rather typically for Polish courts, the execution followed quickly the trial.

This trial raises a number of questions about Jewish-Christian relations, permeability of boundaries between these communities, mobility, and culture, including language and clothing. Both women traveled great distances, Maryna Dawidowa from the town of Vitebsk in the north-eastern part of Poland-Lithuania (today’s Belarus), and Maryna Wojciechówna from Mielec and Jędrzejów in Małopolska to Dubno. Both had no problems entering the Jewish community, one during her travels, the second by marrying a Jew in Dubno. Maryna Dawidowa’s ability to travel thousands of miles and to pass herself off as a Jewess is especially striking. The case is not unique, although admittedly much rarer than Jewish conversions to Christianity and marriage between Jewish converts to Christianity with Christians.

**Suggested Readings:**

Fram, Edward, and Magda Teter. "Apostasy, Fraud, and the Beginning of Hebrew Printing in Cracow." _AJS Review_ 30, no. 1 (2006): 31-66.  
Grodziski, Stanis aw. _Z Dziejów Staropolskiej Kultury Prawnej_. Kraków: TAiWPN Universitas, 2004.

Groicki, Bart omiej. Porzadek Sadow i Spraw Miejskich Prawa Majdeburskiego w Koronie Polskiej. Warszawa,: Wydawnictwa Prawnicze, 1953.  
Teter, Magda. _Jews and Heretics in Catholic Poland: A Beleaguered Church in the Post-Reformation Era_. Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005. ———. "The Legend of Ger Zedek of Wilno as Polemic and Reassurance." _AJS Review_ 29, no. 2 (2005): 237-64.

Teter, Magdalena. "Jewish Conversions to Catholicism in the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth of the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries." _Jewish History_ 17, no. 3 (2003): 257-83.

## Source 1 Translation

This text relates a trial of two Christian women who accepted to Judaism that took place in the city of Dubno in eastern Poland in 1716.

Year 1716, 5 of March

Before the court and the magistrate of Dubno, the case between the court prosecutor, on one side, and, the faithless apostates from the Christian faith, on the other side, was heard:

In the town of Dubno arrived faithless people \[_wiarołomcy_\] from other lands, _alias_ apostates from the Christian faith, whom no sooner than they reached the town, Lord God delivered them, so they may receive their end for their blasphemies. \[They\] having been caught, were put in prison in the castle, and then, at the orders of the castle authorities, were questioned by the magistrate as to where they were from and in what way they scorned the holy Christian faith, and having rejected it, accepted Jewish faith.

And so was presented one \[woman\] named Maryna Dawidowa Syrowajcowa, a widow, \[who\] confessed: “I am from Lithuania, from the town of Witebsk, a daughter of one eastern orthodox priest \[pop\] in Witebsk, Ochrym; and when my father died, my mother, then a widow, gave me in marriage to a Christian man, Dawid Syrowajec, with whom I lived for 10 years, and when my husband died, I connived to abandon the Christian faith and to accept the Jewish faith.” She was asked: “who persuaded you to do so?” And the responded: “No one, on my own I heard from my father, a priest, that the Jewish faith was better than Christian, and so I, having taken it to heart, accepted Jewish faith, some half a year ago, around the Jewish sukkot \[kuczek\] and, having taken on this Jewish faith, about which no one knew, I left Vitebsk on my horse and I traveled about 50 miles, and then I was already provided transportation from town to town \[podwody\] by Jews, because I would say that I was Jewish, and so I was brought to Dubno, and I only spent a night here and was immediately taken to prison.” And she was asked: “Can you return to Christian faith, and do you want to become Christian again?” And she responded: “that I don’t want to and I am ready to die in this Jewish faith for the living God, because it is a better faith, than your Christian, because your faith is false.” And she repeated it again many times during torture \[_przy cielesnej confessacie_\]; since she was subjected to it three times and was flogged with 186 lashes, but she said only the same thing, as the interrogation \[record\] shows in more detail.

The second female, named Maryna Wojciechówna, who was arrested during a wedding (because she had just married a Jew), was also where she was from. And she said: “I am from the town of Mielec, and I served there for three years in a house of a certain Jew, and then I was hired by Jews in Leżajsk, and so in Leżajsk I became Jewish and accepted the Jewish faith upon the persuasion of a Jew, Pasternak, and other Jewish men and women.” And when this woman, Maryna, was taken to torture, she confessed, both before and after, all this the same, and she was first flogged 66 times, and then in the end 40 times; and she said: “that now I am disgusted with the Jewish faith, and so as I used to believe in the crucified Christ, so now I am ready to suffer and die for him.”

Five Jews were also taken during that wedding and were not allowed to finish the wedding. The groom as well as other Jews present there were taken, namely : one Jew, the master of the Jewish hospital who hosted the wedding; the second Jew, who married \[the bride and the groom\]; the third Jew, the groom; the fourth Jew, who traveled with her for a while but who said that he did not know that this maiden was a Christian; the fifth, who wrote a contract \[_karta_\] between them, while sick, and he does not know for whom he had written that contract, as the interrogation record explains. And the five Jews, first voluntarily, then during torture, were interrogated, three times, and each was beaten three times, but lashed, they all said the same: that we did not know, none of us, that this maiden was Christian, as the interrogation record explains in detail.

And so this court, having heard the testimonies under torture, and regards such excess, very rare and unheard-of indeed, as scandalous to God and harmful to the holy, catholic Christian faith. Therefore, basing its judgment upon common law and legal codex, in particular on the article 79 of the Carolina and the Speculum saxonicum, Book I, that all apostates have to be punished by fire (speculum lib. 6.), this court, following these articles of laws, orders through this decree, that for this scandalous deed of abandoning the holy Christian faith, this Maryna Dawidowa, a widow, be burned alive at the stake of wood; but before she goes to the stake of fire, three pieces from her body should be first ripped off with pincers and they should be thrown into the fire and only then should she herself be put at the stake and burned alive.

The maiden, Maryna Wojciechówna, on the other hand, who has returned to Christian faith, and regretting her scandalous deed again wants to be a Christian, should still, according to the commonly accepted laws, be decapitated first and her body is to be burned at the stake like those of other faithless people and apostates.

The five Jews, however, who confessed voluntarily as well as under torture that they did not know that this maiden was a Christian, and moreover, that the maiden, Maryna, herself admitted during tortured that “I do not know whether or not the Jew, Froim Jakubowicz, whom she was marrying, knew that I was a Christian,” and so she did not implicate him, but she said that all Jews must have known that I was a Christian, but because it is only she alone who said that and because the court has no other documents or evidence, so the court frees the Jews from death, namely: Froim Jakubowicz, Maryna’s groom; the second Lejba Mewszowicz, a wanderer; the third one, Lejba Abramowicz, the master of the hospital; the fourth one, Jankiel Boruchowicz, who performed the marriage ceremony unknowingly; and the fifth one, Jankiel Józefowicz, who while sick, after persistent pleading, wrote the contract. And the four are to be lashed, each 100 lashes, except for this Jankiel Józefowicz, who while sick wrote the contract and did not know that she was a Christian. And so, after lashing, the four vagabonds are to be expelled from the town, and those who have wives here in Dubno should be allowed to return to their homes and their wives. And because this scandalous excess happened in Dubno, within the Dubno kahal, and because the kahal was sluggish and kept among themselves these apostates for a week, whether or not they were \[that they were Christians\], and \[the kahal officials\] allowed for the wedding to take place, therefore, the court orders by this decree that Dubno kahal give two stones \[approx. 64 pounds\] of wax and four stones \[128 pounds\] of tallow for the local parish in Dubno; one stone of wax and two stones of tallow for the Bernardine monastery in Dubno; one stone of wax and two stones of tallow for the convent of the Carmelite nuns; one stone of wax for the orthodox church of St. Nicolas of Dubno; and similarly, one stone of wax for the orthodox church of Elijah the Prophet and the orthodox church of St. George on Surmicz; for the Basilian monastery and convent, one stone of wax each... They should pay a fine, as much as it is ordered, to the treasury of His Highness Duke, Lord, as his subjects, and to the castle authorities, as well as the magistrate in Dubno. And because this excess happened within this kahal, and the costs of this case was covered by the Christians in town, therefore, the Dubno kahal should pay the Christians back all legal expenses in this case.

In addition, according to the commonly accepted law, as well as the constitution of the Polish crown _articulo (sacrilegium) libro 3_, a Jew who hires a Christian of whatever sex as a servant should be fined with 100 _grzywien_, while a Christian is prohibited to serve in a Jew’s house under the penalty of imprisonment and a fine \[_wina nieodpustna_\]. A Jew in this situation should pay a fine 10 talars to the treasury of His Highness Duke. This should be announced at the market place three days after the execution of these criminals and so from then on no Chrisitan, male or female, of Roman or Greek faith should dare to serve in a Jewish house under the above described punishment. Given above. Mikołaj Wodowicki, scribe _M.D. juratus_, with his own hand. Jan Hołowczycki, lantwojt, in his own hand, Paweł Kiryanenko, mayor. Jan Kapustenko, mayor. Pavel Iarmolovich, mayor, in his own hand. A stone \[kamień\] was approx. 32 pounds. (In cyrillic.)

## Source 1 Original Text

\[267\] Roku 1716, 5 marca

Przed sądem i aktami majdeburii Dubieńskiej agitowała się sprawa między instygatorem sądowym z jednej, a niezbożnych otszczepieńców wiary chrześciańskiej z drugiej strony, w tem i o to: Iż w mieście Dubnie jawiło się z inszych krajów wiarołomcy, alias odszczepieńcy wiary chrześcijańskiey, którzy, mało się bawiwszy w mieście, że Pan Bóg onych wydał, aby za swoje bluźnierstwo odebrali koniec, ktorzy będąc połapani, do więzienia w zamku osadzeni są, a potem za rozkazaniem zwierzchności zamkowej, do urzędu miejskiego byli pytani, skądby byli i jakim sposobem wiarę świętą chrześciańską pogardzili, i odstąpiwszy od niej, do żydowskiej udali się wiary.

A tak stanąwszy jedna, na imię Maryna Dawidowa, wdowa Syrowajcowa, wyznała: „żem ja jest z Litwy, z miasta Witebska, córka jednego \[268\] witebskiego popa, Ochryma, a gdy mój ojciec umarł, matka mija, będąc wdową, wydała mnie zamąż za chrześcianina, Dawida Syrowajca, z ktorym żyłam lat 10, a gdy mąz mój umarł, umyśliłam, opuściwszy wiarę chrześcijańską, a żydowską przyjąc wiarę.” Pytana była: „kto cię na to namówił?” A ona rzekła: „nikt, ja sama od ojca mego, popa, słyszała, żr ta wiara żydowska jest lepsza a niżeli chrześciańska, a tak ja, to wziąwszy w umysł, zostałam teraz w żydowskiej wierze, już temu około pół roku, jakoby od kuczek żydowskich i, wziąwszy tę żydowską wiarę na siebie, o czem nikt nie wiedział, swoim koniem wyjechałam z Witebska i jechałam około mil 50, a potem dawano mi już podwody od żydów, od miasta do miasta, bom powiadała, żem ja jest żydówka i tak, aż tu do Dubna mnie przywieziono i tylkom noc przenocowała w Dubnie, zaraz mnie wzięto do więzienia.” Pytana była: „Jeżeli możesz się nawrócić na wiarę swiętą i chcesz być chrześcianko znowu?” Odpowiedziała: „że nie chcę i gotowam ginąc w tej żydowskiej wierze dla żywego Boga, bo to lepsza wiara a niżeli wasza chzześciańska \[sic\], bo wasza jest wiara fałszywa.” Co powtóre i po wiele razy twierdziła już przy cielesnej confessacie; gdyż onę po trzy razy pokładano, a bito, ktorej dano plag 186, ala \[sic\] ona to wszystko jednako mówiła, jako szyrzej inquisitia objaśnia.

Drugą dziewkę, na imię Marynę Wojciechównę, którą wzięto podczas tejże wesela (bo juz była ślub wzięła iz żydem), tedy i tej pytano, zkądby była? Ona rzekła: „Jam jest rodem z miasta Mielca, tamem i służyła u pewnego żyda lat 3, a potem mnie do Leżajska namówiono od żydów, a tak w Leżajsku zostałam żydówką z namowy żyda Pasternaka, i innych żydów, i żydówek, w wierze żydowskiej.” A gdy tę dziewkę, Marynę, wzięto na cielesną confessatę, tedy, jak przed biciem, tak i po biciu wszystko jedno wyznawała, tkórą przez razy trzy pokładając, dano rózgami plag 66, na ostatek 40; mówiła: „ze ja teraz brzydzę się tą wiarą żydowską, bom jak wierzyła w Chrystusa ukrzyżowanego, tedy i teraz dla niegom gotowam cierpieć i umierać.” Żydów zaś pięciu, których także do więzienia pobrano podczas tegoż wesela i niedopuszczono onym wesela kończyć i pobrano onych, tak nowożenców, jako i przytomnych natenczas żydów, jako to: żyda jednego, gospodarza szpitalnego, u którego to wesele odprawowało się; drugiego żyda który ślub dawał; trzeciego żyda, oblubieńca tej dziewki ślubnego; czwartego żyda, który jechał z nią tak długo w drodze, a powiadał że nie wiedział, żeby to była ta dziewka chrześcianką; piątego żyda, ktory pidał między nimi kartę, chory będąc, i nie wie komu pisał, jako inquisitia objaśnia. Których żydów pięciu, pierwej dobrowolnie, a potem przy \[269\] cielesnej konfessacie pytano, że każdego bito barbarami po trzy razy, pokładając, jednak nie inaczej wszystko, jedno wszystcy mówili: żeśmy nie wiedzieli żaden, ażeby ta dziewka miała być chrześcianką, jako szerzej w inkwizycyi objaśniono.

Przeto sąd niniejszy, wysłuchawszy inkwizycyi przy cielesnej confessacie, a uważając taki exces popełniony, rzedko abo nigdy niesłychany, haniebny przeciwko Panu Bogu i wierze swiętej, powszechnej, chrzescianskiej szkodliwy. Tedy, przychylając się do prawa pospolitego i artikułów prawnych, jako objaśnia w artikule 79, w księgach cesarskich et speculum saxonicum libro primo, że każdy odszczepienic ma być ogniem karany (speculum lib. 6). Przeto i sąd ninejszy, zchylając się do tychże artikułów prawa, nakazuje niniejszym dekretem, aby, za tak haniebny uczynek w odstąpieniu wiary chrześciańskiej, ta Maryna Dawidowa, wdowa, była żywą na stosie drew spalona; jednak, nim na stos ogniowy pójdzie, aby pierwej kleszczami ciało jej było rwane razy 3 i na ogień rzucone, a potem i samę żywą na stos drew włożono i spalono onę.

Tę zaś dziewkę, Marynę Wojciechownę, która, lubo znowu do wiary świętej chrześciańskiej nawraca się, żałując za swój haniebny uczynek, i znowu chce być chrześcianką, jednak według prawa pospolitego, ma być gardłem karana, to jest, aby, pod miecz głowę oddawszy, ciało ma być spalone na stosie drew, jako wiarołomcy i odszczepieńcy.

Ci zaś żydzi pięciu, którzy, tak dobrowolnie, jako i przy cielesnej confessacie zeznali, że nie wiedzieli, żeby była chrześcianką ta dziewka, a co większa, że i sama ta Maryna, dziewka, zeznała przy cielesnej confessacie na tego żyda, za którego iść miała, to, że ten żyd, Froim Jakubowicz, nie wiem czy on znał, czy nie znał, że ja byłam chrześcianką; dla czego i nie powoływała go w tem, i lubo zeznawała, że musieli żydzie wszyscy wiedziec o mnie, żem chrześcianką była, ale kiedy tylko on asama powiada, a innych dokumentów ani żadnych dowodów na to sąd nie ma, przeto owych pięciu żydów sąd uwalnia od stracenia gardła, jako to: Froima Jakubowicza, poślubionego tej to dziewki Maryny, drugiego Lejbe Mewszowicza, wędrownego, trzeciego Lejbę Abramowicza, gospodarza szpitalnego, czwartego Jankiela Boruchowicza, który slub niewiadomie dawał, piątego Jankiela Józefowicza, który chory będąc, za usilną prośbą, kartę pisał. Między nimi jednak, aby ci czterech byli smagani u pręgi, każdemu po plag 100, krom Jankiela Jozefowicza, który kartę chory, nie wiedząc że to chrześcianka, pisał. A tak, po wybiciu ruzgami u pręgi owych to czterech, wędrownych z miasta wypędzić, a którzy tu, w Dubnie, mają \[270\] żony, te, aby do żon swoich i mieszkania swego byli przypuszczeni. A że ten exces haniebny stanął w Dubnie, między kahałowemi dubieńskiemi, a kahał był w tym ospały i trzymali u siebie przez tydzień owych odszczepieńców, czy to wiedząc, czy to nie wiedząc, i wesele onym pozwolili czynić, tedy nakazuje sąd niniejszym dekretem, aby kahał dubieński dał: na kościoł Fary dubieńskiej wosku kamieni dwa, łoju kamieni cztery, na konwent dubieński ichmościów ojcow Bernardynów wosku kamień jeden, łoju kamieni dwa; do klasztoru ichmościanek panien Karmelitanek konwentu dubieńskiego wosku kamień jeden, łoju kamieni dwa; do cerkwi swiętego Mikołaja w Dubnie wosku kamień jeden; similiter do cerkwi swiętego Eliasza Proroka i do cerkwi na Surmiczu świętego Jerzego; do monastyru ichmościów ojców Bazylianów w Dubnie, wielebnym pannom Bazyliankom do monastyru za stawem dubieńskim rezydującym, tym, każdemu po kamieniu jednemu wosku powinni będą wydać. Wine zaś od tegoż kahału dubieńskiego dać powinni do skarbu jaśnie oświeconego xięcia jegomości, pana i dobrodzieja, ile rozkaz zajdzie, jako nad poddanymi, kaoo też zwierzchności zamkowej i na urząd miejski dubienski. A że u kahału stał się taki exces, a koszta łożyli w tej sprawie z miasta chrześcianie, tedy kahał dubienski powinien wszystkie koszta prawne w tej pretensyi chrześcianom przywrócic. To też dokłada się, według prawa pospolitego, jako statuta korony polskiej articulo (sacrilegium) libor 3 objaśniają, żeby, pod winą sta grzywien na żyda, który by żyd chrześcianina utriusque sexus za sługę przyjmował, a chrześcianin, aby też żydowi nie służył, pod więzieniem i winą nieodpusną. Żyd zaś takowy każdy winę zapłaci do skarbu J. O. X. Jegomości dziesięc talarów bitych. Co ma być obwołano w rynku, trzema dniami po exekucyi tych złoczyńców, aby od tych czas żaden chrześcianin, ani z chrzescianek, tak rzymskiej jako i greckiej religii, nie ważyli się służyc pod winą wyż opisaną. Datum ut supra. Mikołaj Wodowicki, pisarz M. D. Juratus, manu propria. Jan Hołowczycki, lantwojt, [m.pr](http://m.pr). Paweł Kiryanenki, burmistrz. Jan Kapustenko, burmistrz, Павелъ Ярмоловичъ, бурмистръ, m. propr

**Publisher:** Arkhiv Iugo-zapadnoi Rossii, (Kiev: Universitetskaia Tipografia, 1869), vol. I, p. 5: 267-270.