---
title: Under Imperial Protection? Jewish Presence on the Imperial Aulic Court in
  the 16th and 17th Centuries
author: Barbara Staudinger
institution: Institute for Jewish History in Austria, Austria
volume: 5
year: "2008"
slug: imperial-protection-jewish-presence
event:
  name: "Early Modern Workshop: Jewish History Resources"
  theme: Law--Continuity and Change in the Early Modern Period
language:
  - German
description: >-
  From the middle ages on Jewish life in the holy roman empire was characterized
  by their egal status as servants of the imperial chamber (servi camerae,
  Kammerknechte). Paying taxes to the imperial chamber, the Jews stood under
  special protection of the Emperor. The so-called Speyrer Jew Privilege (1544)
  stated the legal framework of the Jewish community of the Empire, prohibiting
  expulsion, and „unjustified“ acusations of ritual murder and securing
  undisturbed religious practice, and imperial conduct and protection. But what
  was this privilege along with other privileges from indiviuals worth in
  reality? Based on two cases from the Imperial Aulic Court (Reichshofrat) my
  lecture will focus the implementation of imperial law as well as the
  opportunities of Jews using the imperial court to push through their right
  against local authorities.


  This presentation is for the following text(s):


  *   Supplication of Samuel Ullman to Emperor Ferdinand II in case of
  restitution ct. the Landgraf Wilhelm of Leuchtenberg, s. D.
      
  *   Supplication of the Franconian Jews to Emperor Maximilian II in case of a
  ritual murder accusation, s. D.
---
<h2 style="text-align: center">Introduction</h2>

From the middle ages on, the life of Jews in the Holy Roman Empire was characterized by their legal status as servants of the Imperial Chamber (servi camerae, Kammerknechte). Since they paid taxes directly to the Imperial cChamber, the Jews stood under special protection of the emperor. The so-called Speyrer Jew Privilege of 1544 provided the legal framework for Jewish life in the Empire. It prohibited expulsion and “unjustified“ accusations of ritual murder and secured the undisturbed practice of their religion, imperial conduct and protection. Furthermore, any cases of ritual murder for which well-founded circumstantial evidence and witnesses were produced had to be brought before the emperor. The local authorities were denied jurisdiction in such cases.

Historical research has considered the Speyrer Jew Privilege as “something of a progress” with regard to ritual murder accusations. Although these accusations were not generally prohibited, special proceedings were laid down which were to redirect the jurisdiction from local courts to the Imperial Legal Courts and thus afforded more legal certainty. However, this innovation did not stem from an overall pro-Jewish attitude, but was an attempt to strengthen imperial rights against local and territorial authorities. The emperor as the protector of the Jews was not willing to give up his rights. Especially in the 16th century the emperor tried to forge even closer ties with the Jews by giving them special privileges, both communally and individually, and by having cases involving Jewish rights tried by the Imperial Aulic Court.

Did the Speyrer Jew Privilege really cause a “rationalisation”, or heightened legal security, for Jews? The first case to be discussed involves a ritual murder accusation in the Bishopric of Wurzburg. The background of this accusation was political, as the bishop’s main aim was to weaken the Franconian Imperial Knights. After the expulsion of the Jews from Wurzburg in 1560, no Jews lived within the territory of the bishopric any more, but the territories of the Imperial Knights and neighbouring counties still housed Jews. The accusation of ritual murder gave the prince-bishop a welcomed opportunity to demand the expulsion of Jews living in the neighbouring territories and counties. His actions were thus an instrument in the basic conflict between princely sovereignty and the autonomy of the Imperial Knights – comparable to the emperor’s attempt to weaken princely power by giving privileges to the Jews.

The Jews’ right to live and trade within the Holy Roman Empire, as supported by the emperor, was increasingly being questioned or denied by territorial and local authorities. This is also evident in the second case, a lawsuit of Samuel Ulmann against his lord, the Landgrave of Leuchtenberg, concerning outstanding debts, confiscation of property, and illegal inprisonment. Samuel, who came from a well known Jewish family of Gunzburg (Swabia), appealed to the Emperor and the Imperial Aulic Court in order to defend himself against injustice and protect his rights against his lord.

These two examples show the difficulties in realizing Jewish rights in the territories and counties of the Holy Roman Empire. While the emperor was interested to protecting the Jews and upholding Jewish rights against local authorities, political considerations often demanded a different course of action in order not to offend those local authorities.

**Bibliography**

Friedrich _Battenberg_, Die Ritualmordprozesse gegen Juden in Spätmittelalter und Frühneuzeit – Verfahren und Rechtsschutz, in: Die Legende vom Ritualmord. Zur Geschichte der Blutbeschuldigungen gegen Juden, ed. by Rainer _Erb_. Berlin 1993, pp. 95-132.

Friedrich _Battenberg_, Rechtliche Rahmenbedingungen jüdischer Existenz in der Frühen Neuzeit zwischen Reich und Territorien, in: Judengemeinden in Schwaben im Kontext des Alten Reiches, ed. by Rolf _Kießling_. Berlin 1995, pp. 53-79.  
Stefan _Rohrbacher_, Ungleiche Partnerschaft. Simon Günzburg und die erste Ansiedlung von Juden vor den Toren Augsburgs in der Frühen Neuzeit, in: Landjudentum im deutschen Südwesten während der Frühen Neuzeit, ed. by Rolf _Kießling_/Sabine _Ullmann_. Berlin 1999, pp. 192-219.

Barbara **Staudinger,** Ritualmord und Schuldklage. Prozesse fränkischer Juden vor dem Reichshofrat im 16. und 17. Jahrhundert, in: ... geschützt, geduldet, gleichberechtigt ... Die Juden im baden-württembergischen Franken vom 17. Jahrhundert bis zum Ende des Kaiserreichs (1918), ed. by Gerhard _Taddey_. Ostfildern 2005, pp. 47-59.

Barbara Staudinger, “Gelangt an eur kayserliche Majestät mein allerunderthenigistes Bitten”. Handlungsstrategien der jüdischen Elite am Reichshofrat im 16. und 17. Jahrhundert, in: Hofjuden und Landjuden. Jüdisches Leben in der Frühen Neuzeit, ed. by Sabine _Hödl_/Peter _Rauscher_/Barbara _Staudinger_. Berlin, Wien 2004, pp. 143-183. Sabine Ullmann, Nachbarschaft und Konkurrenz. Juden und Christen in den Dörfern der Markgrafschaft Burgau 1650-1750. Göttingen 1999.

<h2 style="text-align: center">Source 1 Translation</h2><p style="text-align: center"><strong>Supplication of the Franconian Jews to Emperor Maximilian II in case of a ritual murder accusation, s. D.<br>October 18, 1570</strong></p>

_Supplication of the Franconian Jews to Emperor Maximilian II. concerning a Ritual murder case, s.d._, Haus- Hof- und Staatsarchiv Wien (HHStA), _Reichshofrat (RHR), Antiqua 1157, Nr. 4, unfol._

We, the undersigned most humble Jews, are forced to address to Your Imperial Majesty this most humble supplication and complaint. Both Your Imperial Majesty’s Most Enlightened, Mighty and Unconquerable Father and Predecessor, Emperor Ferdinand of the Empire’s most praiseworthy and blessed memory, and Your Imperial Majesty Yourself have most graciously privileged the Jewry of the Empire, besides other favours and privileges, to pass, trade and walk safely and peacefully in and through Franconia. In addition, all persons of high and low standing were seriously and under penalty ordered to leave the Jews in peace and quiet and not to hinder them in any way. In spite of all this, some time ago our Right Reverend Gracious Prince Bishop Friedrich of Wurzburg accused two poor innocent Jewish boys of a murder and arrested them in Wurzburg; prohibited Jews under penalty from entering the town of Wurzburg; and raised the customs and safe conduct fees for Jews in Iphofen and other towns, against the previous custom. Similarly, in His Highness the Bishop’s town Volckach, no Jew’s person or life is safe, but the Jews are being beaten, pelted and insulted. This kind of conduct is then not punished; instead, the mayor answered the complaints by the Jews by saying that he could not help and that they should sue in Wurzburg. On top of this, a citizen of Wurzburg by the name of Hans Schimell, who lives in Unter-Eisensheim, beat and wounded the Jew Abraham of Hirschfeld on his doorstep, against all law. In addition, the Reeve of Wurzburg at Essleben, Valtin Buhlman, recently beat a Jew of Schwanfeld, who had paid him a huge amount of usury for a small loan, so severely with a baton that he could not move his arm for a long time, and without a cause; when the Jew then claimed the protection of the Imperial law, the reeve answered contemptuously with swear words.

Since, Your Most Gracious Majesty and Lord, all that has been told is true, and since in many other towns in the Bishopric of Wurzburg Jews are daily and against all custom being persecuted and taken advantage of and oppressed, we, on behalf of our brothers the Jews in Franconia and for ourselves, beg Your Imperial Majesty most humbly and urgently to graciously order these actions to stop; to graciously protect us through the Imperial privileges; and to order the previously mentioned Bishop of Wurzburg earnestly in the future to leave us in peace and unhindered as before. In particular, we beg Your Imperial Majesty to award the previously mentioned two culprits, His Highness the Bishop’s servants and subjects, a just penalty including a complete refund of doctors’ fees, compensation, expenses and damages; to stop such violent criminals and others like them; to allow all Jews to pass through and trade in His Highness the Bishop’s province, bishopric and territory; and to permit us to remain under the sovereignty of the Imperial Knights.

We and our brothers the Jews in Franconia are always willing to serve Your Imperial Majesty in most humble obedience and with greatest diligence.

Representatives of the Jewry of the Province Franconia

Attachement:

Memorandum from Bishop Friedrich of Wurzburg to Emperor Maximilian II. concerning a ritual murder case, Wurzburg, October 14, 1570, Haus- Hof- und Staatsarchiv Wien (HHStA), Reichshofrat (RHR), Antiqua 1157, Nr. 4, unfol.

Your Imperial Majesty can at all times be certain of my most humble and diligent services. Most Gracious Emperor and Lord,

I have most humbly and with the appropriate respect received and read three letters from Your Imperial Majesty: the first was issued in Schwabisch Hall, was dated from June 13 and arrived on June 18, while the other two, dated from August 5 and September 26, concerning the Jews Mosse and Gumprechten, were delivered together on October 3.

Had I received the other letter from Your Imperial Majesty, which was issued on August 5, earlier, I would not have left it unanswered; therefore, I would like to apologize most humbly to Your Imperial Majesty. In Your letter, Your Imperial Majesty report of the complaints of Mosse and Gumprecht, Jews of Dortzbach; that they had agreed to interrogation on the subject of the suspicion that had fallen on them concerning the murdered son of a baker; that they wanted to prove their innocence and had named a next person, Ulrich Steurieth of Rinderfeld, as the true culprit; and that they had, for the purpose of the interrogation of witnesses who should prove this person guilty, asked me for letters to the witnesses’ lords. They claim that I had refused them all this and had arranged to delay the proposed voluntary interrogation and immediately proceeded to torture them. In addition, Your Imperial Majesty ordered me in Your third and last Imperial letter, if matters were indeed as in the Jews’ report, and if the alleged culprit who was to be found guilty with the help of the witnesses had indeed been released without bail, to order my secular counsellors and commanders once again to release the Jews on bail and security from their long captivity, or, should I not do so, to inform Your Imperial Majesty of my well-founded and serious reasons.

First, concerning the interrogation offered by the Jews and the proof of their innocence, namely that another person was guilty of the murder, I will not keep from Your Imperial Majesty my true opposing statement on the issue. The lawyers of the captured Jews had originally offered to prove the innocence of the arrested Jews and the fact that someone else, the potter Ulrich Seidenschwantz - who in Your Imperial Majesty’s letter was called Ulrich Steurieth and who at that time had lived in Rinderfeld, but had later moved with his family from there to the hamlet Strut, located in the tithe district Rothingen, under my sovereignty - that this Ulrich Seydenschwantz was the true culprit in the murder of the baker’s son. Besides they ask that I arrest and imprison said culprit; that I allow them to prove the innocence of the incarcerated Jews and that the culprit is said Seidenschwantz; and that I should conduct the interrogation at their expense.

The lawyers insisted on proving this, in spite of some important evidence and causes for suspicion: that the said son of a baker, who comes from Hollenbach under the sovereignty of Hohenloe and was about 12 years old, could only have been murdered and killed by these Jews, because those were present at the site of the murder at the time and no one else had been seen, and not because of money, since he had no more than one and a half batzen (small currency) with him. Since it was found, when the body was inspected, that the veins at the side of the boy’s neck had been slashed but not pierced, it must be concluded (since very little blood was found on the ground at the murder site) that his blood had been diligently collected. In addition, it should be told that on the day after the murder the entire population of the two villages Hollenbach and Alringen (the murder had been committed approximately half way between them in a field) had to gather, and everyone had to touch the corpse of the boy; but there was no sign with anyone. But when, finally, the captured Jews were brought there and had to touch it as well, the corpse visibly began to sweat and bleed, as should have been reported to Your Imperial Majesty. Therefore, according to such evidence and other reports, I had reason enough to subject the arrested Jews to torture. However, in order that their lawyers and friends should not be able to complain about the production of evidence as had been offered; or that they had been treated unlawfully and against the custom; and because it is my will that no one, Christians, Jews or heathens, should be endangered or discriminated against in capital cases involving blood and life; and because I would not be able to justify such actions before Your Imperial Majesty or even more before God Almighty at Judgment Day; I sent an oral message to the lawyers of the Jews through my counsellors and commanders that, if they put in 400 florin bail, they could try to prove that the alleged culprit had committed the murder; if they were not able to prove this, however, they should prepare for trial in the bishopric.

Additionally I wanted to report that the aforementioned alleged culprit was arrested and their witnesses interrogated, as they had themselves offered, at their expense. After they had been given this message, the Jews offered in the proscribed form and with the sanction of their lords to take out bail; but then they delayed this and looked for excuses; also changed their own bail; and one bailsman was not sealed (approved) by his own lord but by another noble. Because of these delays and dangerous changes, I felt compelled to arrest the bailsmen as well and to keep them in jail until they handed over the bail that had already been granted. Therefore I released them after eight days.

The Jews claim in their supplication to Your Imperial Majesty that after the payment of the bail I had not permitted to release the incarcerated Jews, against whom I had used even more severe imprisonment and torture thereafter. Additionally that I had, after releasing those citizens, forbidden them to enter my town Wurzburg und that I had further incensed against them those with whom they were in ill favour. In all this, Most Gracious Lord Emperor, the petitioners have reported Your Imperial Majesty untruth and unreason, for they can never prove that I had with one word promised them that after the payment of bail the imprisoned suspects would be released, because it is not appropriate and irresponsible in such an important and suspicious case; neither have I punished them with more severe incarceration or torture (which was only used with kindness, by way of threats); neither have I forbidden the citizens to enter my town Wurzburg. Only the Jews, who had attached themselves to the others and were coming here nearly daily, I forbid staying here according to previous laws.

Nevertheless, before the bail had been paid and the questions (for the interrogation) submitted, I had the alleged culprit, Ulrich Seidenschwantz, arrested and incarcerated in Rottingen. By ordinance from my town Wurzburg, I also caused this man to be seriously questioned about the murder; but from his statement and protestations of innocence as well as from the reports I had gathered, one could not conclude that he could be suspect or guilty of the murder. Therefore, and because he had been incarcerated for some days, and because the Jews had stretched and delayed the issue themselves with their bail and their questions, I could not refuse his advocates’ most humble petition to release from prison, on bail, the one Seidenschwantz, and to let him be with his wife and children, in order to save the daily mounting costs of incarceration. He is still there now, and there is no sign that he plans to move in the near future.

But I considered the renewed request by the Jews, who had heard of the release of the alleged culprit, for another interrogation of the same witnesses - in light of the situation and considering the information, evidence and public opinion - not responsible, and therefore their request was not granted. This especially so because the natural father of the murdered son of a baker and the Right Honourable Prince , my dear friend Margrave Georg Friedrich of Brandenburg, as well as the widow, mother and sons of the Count of Hohenloe, under whose sovereignty the baker’s son had been born and raised, earnestly admonished and requested me to execute the law. Therefore the Jews have reported falsely to Your Imperial Majesty that I had planned to take advantage of them in this case, or that I had suppressed the production of the alleged evidence of their innocence. Although I had doubts whether to permit this, in order to avoid misunderstandings, I had those same witnesses properly interrogated on the questions they themselves (the Jews) had submitted, partly here in my office, and the rest by the counsellors of my Lord and friend the Deutschmeister at Mergentheim, by a commissioner who had been appointed by them (the Jews). Since the interrogation done at Mergentheim was only sent to me on the last Saturday in September, the case has rested for a while, but now it has been taken up again and will be deliberated and dealt with properly and lawfully.

Your Imperial Majesty can see from the reasons and causes given in my true report stated above how justly the Jews accuse me before Your Imperial Majesty of endangering and fraud; and how I had not permitted them the production of evidence and interrogation they had offered, because, after I had not permitted them their production of evidence and had not wanted to hear truth and justice, I wanted to proceed with the torture immediately; and how, from June 1st on, the day that they had gone to prison, since when they have been incarcerated without torture up until today, I had not wanted to be rid of the case.

May Your Imperial Majesty realize that, according to the information I got from the Jews and according to the situation, I cannot and do not want to act other than as conforming to the criminal laws of the Holy Roman Empire (of the German Nation) decreed by Your Imperial Majesty and Your Predecessors in the empire, since I must answer to God and to Your Imperial Majesty for my actions. All this I wanted to report truthfully and diligently according to Your Imperial Majesty’s wish, and most humbly and diligently not keep back my answer.

I commend myself most humbly to Your Imperial Majesty, Date: in my town Wurzburg, October 14, 1570  
Friedrich, Bishop at Wurzburg and Duke of Franconia

<h2 style="text-align: center">Source 2 Translation</h2><p style="text-align: center"><strong>Supplication of Samuel Ullman to Emperor Ferdinand II in case of restitution ct. the Landgraf Wilhelm of Leuchtenberg, s. D.</strong></p><p style="text-align: center"><strong>March 28, 1620</strong></p>

_Supplication of Samuel Ullman to Emperor Ferdinand II. concerning restitution of property owed by Landgrave Wilhelm of Leuchtenberg, s.d. (March 28, 1620), HHStA, RHR, Denegata Antiqua 177, fol. 128r-138v._

/fol. 129r/ (...)  
Most Gracious Lord. Against my will, I am unfortunately forced to most humbly trouble Your Imperial Majesty with this my supplication, and to beg You, the Highest Authority appointed by God and the Holy Roman Empire, for protection and help, and am obliged to report to you the injury which has been unjustly perpetrated against me by the Right Reverend Prince and Lord, Lord Wilhelm Landgrave of Leuchtenberg, with the most humble request that Your Imperial Majesty may most graciously hear my complaint. After I had, two years ago and accourding to the wish of His Gracious Highness the Prince of Leuchtenberg, moved to and established my household at Pfreimbt, under his protection, I lived there for not quite 4 weeks before the judge of Leuchtenberg, on behalf of His Gracious Highness the Prince, approached me for a loan of 50 florin for 2 or 3 days, which I humbly granted. When I later asked for repayment, I was sent to the Office of the Landgrave of /fol. 129v/ Leuchtenberg with a letter, but there I was finally and summarily refused payment. When I reported this to His Gracious Highness the Prince, I was brought before the landgrave’s judge, where I did not receive the desired payment either, but was instead fined, at the command of His Gracious Highness the Prince, 100 florin in penalty, which I was forced to pay.

Second, His Gracious Highness the Prince of Leuchtenberg on various occasions borrowed from me, besides cash, things and all kinds of trade goods (with which I had been trading), and consequently the outstanding bill amounts to 700 florin.

Third, His Gracious Highness borrowed a few golden bangles worth 28 florin for his maid-servant, Dorothea of Nurnberg, which has not been paid yet.

Fourth, about two years before the death of His Gracious Highness the Prince’s wife, two silver flasks were ordered, in the presence of my wife, from a goldsmith in the Judengasse in Prague, and an amount of old silver paid for them; however, wares for /fol. 130r/ 80 florin were bought from another Jew on credit, and the goldsmith appointed as guarantor and promised more silver for the flasks and speedy payment of the debt. But three years have passed since then, and in spite of the fact that His Gracious Highness the Prince’s wife remained alive for another one and a half years, the goldsmith had to pay the guarantee, and my wife, although she was present at this deal neither as a mediator nor as a guarantor, but only as a servant, was forced to pay 200 florin as payment for the silver that had been entrusted to the goldsmith, which was worth not even 8 florin.

No less, and fifth, at the same time my father-in-law Moyses – now of blessed memory – begged humbly for the gracious remittance of these my penalties, and stated that, since all this had happened before our marriage and did not concern it, and since there should be no quarrel amongst us, he would humbly offer to give His Gracious Highness the Prince 50 florin /fol. 130v/ because of my wife. However, this had no effect; instead, His Gracious Highness the Prince took the 50 florin and nevertheless afterwards had the house of my father-in-law forced open by his former steward Hanns Sigmund of Tieg, his scribes and judges, and two of his town ushers; and on top of this, he had all his locked chests and wardrobes opened, and confiscated all his money, gold and silver, and all the pawns deposited by the Prince and other nobles: rings and jewellery worth more than 500 florin, and in particular a golden memorial coin (Gnadenpfennig) studded with diamonds and rubies belonging to a certain Prince Fohenstrauss, as well as a silver belt weighing 38 lot (weight unit), and a coral rosary with a silver tassel, and a gold ring studded with diamonds that belongs to an orphaned child and for the restitution of which I myself have been begged many times. However, this was not the end of it, but on the same day my father-in-law was called before the town judge at the order of His Gracious Highness the Prince, /fol. 131r/ and, ostensibly because His Gracious Highness the Prince knew that he (my father-in-law) was rich in cash and otherwise, and that without doubt he had removed the majority of his property from his sovereignty to another place, he would have to pay 1000 florin in penalty within eight days. Besides this it was ordered that my father-in-law should, against a deduction of 100 florin, return a pawn belonging to Strinlingen, His Gracious Highness the Prince’s former equerry, which my father-in-law had pawned for 76 florin. In spite of this, my father- in-law had to pay the 1000 florin without the deduction of those 76 florin.

Sixth, when, about three months after the case described above, His Gracious Highness the Prince’s dean sold 100 cords of his own wood both in the neighbouring Electoral Palatiate and in the Landgrave’s territory, without being prohibited by his lord to do so, I myself bought 9 cords of the same. His Honourable Gracious Highness the Prince then fined me 50 florin of penalty under the pretext that the Lord Dean had not been permitted to sell this wood; but all others who had done the same /fol. 131v/ were released.

Seventh, when my father-in-law passed away about half a year ago, His Gracious Highness the Prince prepared to sell the inheritance for himself, against the old custom. When I asked that the inheritance be released, I was told in confidence, through the wife of the steward, that His Gracious Highness the Prince would be willing to release the inheritance in exchange for a gift. I humbly and willingly agreed to this, only I asked to kindly be granted deferment until my brother-in-law had arrived here from Bohemia. Since I was granted the deferment, and since my brother-in-law only arrived in the Holy Week, I delayed the presentation of the gift because of the holidays; but His Gracious Highness the Prince punished me again, called me on the third day of Easter and imposed on me a payment of 1000 florin (to be paid in 8 days), and because of the default 500 florin, and another 500 florin tax on the inheritance of my father-in-law. In spite of the fact that I begged humbly and explained /fol. 132r/ that it was against the old custom and not customary in the entire Holy Roman Empire to have to pay such a great or even a smaller sum to the sovereign lords on account of default, and that concerning the 500 florin His Gracious Highness the Prince had demanded as tax one would have to wait until the amount of the entire inheritance was certain, because without this one could not insist on this sum; and even if it was correct, His Gracious Highness could deduct this tax from the debt which His Gracious Highness had in the inheritance. However, I could not succeed with His Gracious Highness the Prince, instead another 500 florin in penalty were imposed on me, and, in order to affect faster payment, stocks were put up in the garden of his house in the suburbs in the open air, to which I and my brother-in-law, in spite of the fact that the deadline of 8 days had not expired yet and we had another 4 days, were to be tied with hands and feet. Although I was granted three days’ deferment through /fol. 132v/ urgent supplication and great effort, I still had to pay the 1500 florin imposed on me.

Finally, humbly and most importantly, I am not able to keep from Your Imperial and Royal Majesty the fact that a short while ago, when the troops of Mansfeld were moving towards Bohemia through the Electoral Palatinate and the Landgrave of Leuchtenberg’s territory, the Lord Landgrave did not stay here; instead, not only all the Prince’s councilors of the provincial government, but also citizens and subjects in fear tried to save themselves with their children and property, as good as they could. Similarly, I felt obliged to flee and seek safety for myself and my family, as good as possible, all with the knowledge and permission of the the Princely Landgrave’s councilors of the provincial government and with an escort provide by the Electoral Palatinate, until the return of His Gracious Highness of Leuchtenberg. Many distinguished nobles and other persons had fled from the sovereignty of the Prince of Leuchtenberg to that of Hans Adam of Sparneck at Toissnitz, a noble of the Electoral Palatinate. However, by the time I and many others had arrived home, after the troops of Mansfeld had passed through and His Gracious Highness the Prince of Leuchtenberg had returned, I had already quarrelled with Sparneck at the court of the Electoral Palatinate – at first out of court – on account of a pawn that had lost value. Sparneck then threatened that, if I should sue him before the Gracious Electoral Prince, his sovereign, he would cook my goose and denounce me, with the help of evidence and witnesses true or false, to His Gracious Highness the Prince to such and extent that I would throw up my hands in horror /fol. 133v/, and finally, if this should fail, he would pay me back with his gun. And so it happened that on my return (may Your Imperial and Royal Majesty hear my supplication), I was obliged to hear from some townspeople that I had fallen out of grace with His Most Gracious Highness the Prince. This was manifested by the fact that he (the Landgrave of Leuchtenberg) cancelled and remitted the debts that the citizens of his territory and other subjects had with me. Thereafter Sparneck also put his lies into action in the sense that he claimed that I had insulted the maid-servant of His Gracious Highness the Prince, Dorothea of Nurnberg, although he will never be able to prove that I had ever allowed myself to be reduced to such denunciations. Nevertheless His Gracious Highness the Prince, without even hearing me in this matter, not only had me locked up in the castle’s tower, but also ordered my wife, my mother-in-law - who is more than 70 years old -, my eight children - one of who is only 3 years old, another 19 months and a third 12 weeks – and two of my maids to be locked up in the office. My old mother- in-law, my wife and two daughters were stripped and searched if they had any money or valuables on their persons. When finally they found only 20 kreutzers with my mother- in-law, the district judge was supposed to take those off her, but finally let her keep them on account of her urgent supplication. While I and my family were incarcerated for 31 days, together with two criminals and incurring great costs, the landgrave’s steward, the judge of Kunreuth and others broke into my house, opened everything and confiscated gold, money, jewellery, silver and other valuables that had for the most part been pawns of young lords, nobles and other distinguished persons. On top of that they confiscated my father-in-law’s register of debts, all letters they could find, and at the same time his (the landgrave’s) own obligation, all wares and trade goods as well as linen and clothes worth more than 300 florin. On the same day /fol. 134v/ at midnight, another 9 persons were sent to the house who took everything that was left, and my wares were given partly to the maids and partly to His Gracious Highness the Prince’s maid-servant, who then dressed in them. As if this was not enough, the next day not only my house, but even my mother-in-law’s house was searched by the town ushers to check if nothing was hidden there. It is painful to hear that His Gracious Highness the Prince gave the handsome pawns and jewellery of nobles to His maid-servant, who most disrespectfully wears them up until today. However, this was not the end of it, for His Gracious Highness had me locked up in four different prisons and threatened, if I did not hand over my treasure or what I had hidden, I would be handed over to the executioner and punished with death through hanging. To this I replied regretfully that, as I was incarcerated in the tower prison and due to the fact /fol. 135r/ that all my possessions, my debt registers, pawns and letters as well as my entire property had been taken from me, I could not quickly raise much or even little money from anyone. Even my brother-in-law was brought to me by the town usher, under the pretext that he should advise me on how to raise money, and then forcefully incarcerated in the tower, where men and women who are not related are locked up together, without trial, in a dark and disgusting prison without consideration for their natural modesty, and kept there for three days, as he complained in great pain. In the meanwhile my wife was banished by His Gracious Highness, with her innocent and suckling children, and on top of that it was ordered to withdraw all His Gracious Highness the Prince’s obligations with her, the credit sum of which alone amounted to 3500 florin, and to pay 3000 florin in penalty. /fol. 135v/ Although my wife handed over the requested obligation to His Princely Highness, which he immediately tore up, His Princely Highness was not satisfied with this, but she was forced to calculate the debt including interest of two obligations which I had received against pawns and which His Gracious Highness had taken from my house, but which fell due while I was in prison; this sum His Gracious Highness the Prince confiscated after returning the pawns. Three days later, when I and my mother-in-law were still in prison, His Gracious Highness the Prince’s chamberlain, town judge, usher, messenger and man-servant visited me in prison and showed me a decision that, unless I paid the 3000 florin in cash, a trial date had been set and my execution was to take place in three days’ time. To this I answered, in good conscience and innocently, that I was not aware what and how much money my wife had loaned, but that, if I could speak to her personally, /fol. 136r/ I would ask her to deal with this matter. His Gracious Highness then ordered His judge and two ushers to escort me to the border of the Electoral Palatinate and deported me, without shackles, as I was not a criminal, to the Palatinate, hoping that I could extort more money from my wife. But since nothing was left and I was now in the territory of the Electoral Palatinate, I was graciously granted refuge there up until now.

Most Gracious Emperor, King and Lord, these matters were as told and not otherwise: my brother-in-law, mother-in-law, wife and children were kept in prison by His Honourable Gracious Highness the Prince of Leuchtenberg for up to two years; as I have outlined above point by point (and as can be proven even today), all pawns belonging not to me but to princes, nobles and other distinguished persons were taken from me; and I am now unable to return the pawns that were taken from me by His Gracious Highness the Prince. Consequently, unless Your Imperial and Royal Majesty help me, I, my wife and my eight children will be reduced to begging and destitution, and neither my person nor my life will be safe. May therefore reach my most humble, urgent and submissive supplication Your Imperial and Royal Majesty so that You may, as Most Enlightened Emperor and Protector of Justice, take to heart the events mentioned above, and decree that His Gracious Highness the Landgrave not only immediately return all the confiscated debt registers, pawns, money and fines, wares and trade goods and all other property, but also pay his own debts; and that I be protected against His Gracious Highness in the future; and that my old mother-in-law and children, who had been arrested, be released. Additionally, he (the landgrave) should urge all his other subjects who owe me money to pay their debts. In order to ensure that His Gracious Highness the Landgrave obey this decree, I once more most humbly beg that His Imperial and Royal Majesty may, for the sake of God and His Will, /fol. 137v/ set up a commission so that I am granted justice in everything, and really receive help; and may most graciously be considered that not only I, but my parents and ancestors have resided in the Margraviate Burgau, under the Most Commendable House of Austria, for more than 100 years, and have always acted irreproachably. In order to be granted justice, I would like to most humbly call on Your Imperial and Royal Majesty, and to submit to Your gracious decision, which I hope for most urgently and humbly, and to Your Most Lordly protection.

Samuel of Gunzburg  

<h2 style="text-align: center">Source 1 Original Text</h2><p style="text-align: center"><strong>Supplikation der Judenschaft von Franken an Kaiser Maximilian II. wegen eines Ritualmordvorwurfes<br>October 18, 1570</strong></p>

_Supplikation der Judenschaft von Franken an Kaiser Maximilian II. wegen eines Ritualmordvorwurfes und anderer Vorkommnisse in Franken, s. D.,_ Haus-, Hof- und Staatsarchiv Wien \[HHStA\], _Reichshofrat \[RHR\], Antiqua 1157, Nr. 4, unfol_

E\[ur\] röm\[isch\] k\[aiserliche\] M\[ajestä\]t. in allerunderthenigkheit supplicierent und clagent vorzutragen, mögen wir entsbenannte dero demuethigiste juden tringender notturfft nicht umbgehen. Wiewoll hiebevorn weilandt der allerdurchleuchtigist großmechtigist und unuberwindlichist unnser allergnedigister herr kayser Ferdinandt, e\[ur\] röm. ksl. Mt. herr vatter und vorfahr im hl. Reich hochlöblichister und selligister gedechtnuß, dann auch e\[ur\] röm. ksl. Mt. selbsten die allgemayne judischaidt beneben andern begnadungen und freyhaiten in sonderhaidt auch allergnedigist priviligirt und versehen, das dieselben sampt und besonder in und durch das Landt zu Franckhen allenthalben freyh, sicher und unverhindert meniglichs paßiren, handlen und wandlen sollen und mögen, daruff auch allen und jeden hohes und nidriges standts bey hohen namhafften peenen ernstlichen gebiettendt und verpiettendt, sie die juden dabey ruhig und fridtsam verpleyben und kaynerlay weyß ihnen daran eintrag oder hinderniß zuthun, so hat doch uber und wider dieses alles der hochwurdig unnser gnediger herr bischoven Fryderich zu Wurzburgk etc. verschiener zeit und nemblich, seidt hero zween arme unschuldige unserer juden knaben einer mordthat bezichtigt und zu Wurzburgk fenklichen eingezogen worden, bey schwerer straff verpiethen laßen, daß khain jude in die stadt Wurzburgk hinfuro zu khommen, dazu auch der zoll und gleidtgellt daselbsten zu Iphoven und mehr andern örtten wider allt herkhommen und gebrauch gegen die juden hochlich erstaygert. Deß gleichen in irer f\[ürstlich\] Gn\[aden\] stadt Volckach kein jude leibs noch lebens gesichert, sonder werden die juden dern eines hefftiglich geschlagen, geworffen und verhönet; daran auch nicht gefrevelt noch gesundigt, sonder uff der juden beclagen durch den schultheißen inen geantworttet wurde, konne nit helffen, mögen zu Wurzburgkh darumb clagen. Uber dieses auch hat neulicher zeidt ein Wurzburgischer ainspenniger zu under Eysenshaim wonhaft, Hanns Schimell genannt, Abraham juden zu Hirschfellt vor seiner haußthur uber all recht erbiethend hardt geschlagen und verwundet. Item der Wurzburgisch vogt zu Eßleben, Valtin Buhlman, unlangsten einem juden von Schwanfelldt, wellcher ime vogten doch wegen einer geringen vorgestreckhten summe gellts einen vast großen wucher bezahlt gehabt, deromaßen mit einer hauen geschlagen, das er den arm eine langs zeidt nicht bewegen mögen, und solliches one allen gegebne verursachung wider vilfahltig geburlich beruffung zu ksl. rechts hilff, welliches dann er vogt mit ganz schimpflichen wortten verachtet hatt.

Dieweill dann allergnedigister kayser und herr sollichem allem und jeden in wahrheidt wie jezt erzehlt ist, auch sonsten ahn vielen orten hin und wider im stifft Wurzburgk die juden sampt und besonder uff eußerst teglich vervolgt, wider alle herkhommen und gebrauch beschwerdt, erstaygert und betrangt werden, alß gelangt ahn e\[ur\] röm. ksl. Mt. unser im namen und von wegen anderer unserer mitbruder dern juden in Franckhenlanden whonende, auch fur uns selbsten allerunderthenigist und flehlichist bitt, die wollen hiebey allergnedigist einsehens und abwendung thuen, unß bey dero miltkayserlich gegebnen privilegien und freyheiten allergnedigist schutzen, handhaben und darauf hocherhantem bischoven zu Wurzburgk ernstlichen ufferlegen und bevelhen, uns dero hinfuro rhusam und unverhindert wie von alters hero befreuen und gebrauchen zu laßen; insonderhait aber obernannte baide theter irer fstl. Gn. diener und hinderseßen zu gnugsamer gebuerender straff beneben volkhomener erstattung und abtrag dern arzt löhn, schmerzens interesse, costen und schäden zu weysen und anzuhalten. Vor sollichen und dergleichen sträflichen gewaltsamen thater möglich zu sein und denen abzuweren auch die juden in gemain und sonderheit durch irer fstl. Gn. land, stift und gepieth sicher paßiern, wandlen und under dero ritterschaft whonen und pleyben zu laßen, daß wollen und sollen umb e\[ur\] röm. ksl. Mt. in allerunderthenigister schuldiger gehorsame mit hochster gevlißenheit zu bedienen wir sampt berurten unsern mitbrudern den juden in Franckhen allezeit begirig und willig sein und erfunden werden.

\[...\]  
Gemayner judischaidt aus dem land zu Franckhen abgeordnete.

attachement:

_Bericht von Bischof Friedrich von Würzburg an den Kaiser über die Rechtmäßigkeit der Ritualmordanklage, Würzburg, 1570, Oktober 14, ebd._

\[...\]  
Euer kayserlichen mayestat sind mein allerunderthenigste schuldige und gar geflissene dienst allzeit zuvoran. Allergnedigister kayser und herr. Von e\[ur\] röm. ksl. Mt. sind mir drey schreiben, das erst, so zu Schwabischen Hall unter dem dato am 13. Junii außgangen, auf den 18. desselben hernach zukommen und die andern zway, dero data das ain den 5. Augusti und das letzt den 26. Septembris jungstverschinen weisen, betreffend Mosse und Gumprechten die juden, so hie in meiner statt Wirtzburg gefengklich verhaft ligen, bede miteinander auf den 3. dits monats Octobris uberantwurt worden, welche drey schreiben e\[ur\] ksl. Mt. halber ich allerunterthenigist mit gebürlicher reverentz entpfangen und verlesen. Und wo mir das ander e\[ur\] ksl. Mt. schreiben, so den 5. Augusti ausgangen, eher zukommen were, so wolte e\[ur\] ksl. Mt. ich auf dasselbig allerunderthenigst unbeantwort nit gelassen haben, darumb itztvermelter ursach halber e\[ur\] ksl. Mt. mich allergnedigst für entschuldigst halten wöllen. Das aber e\[ur\] ksl. Mt. in demselben irem andern kayserlichen schreiben einfüren und melden, wie e\[ur\] ksl. Mt. uf clag Mosse und Gumpen der juden zu Dertzbach dienern berichtet worden seyen, das ungeachtet des verdachtz, so aines ermordten beckenknabens halber auf sie gefallen, sie sich zu recht genugsam zu purgieren erbietig gemacht, auch zu außfurung irer unschulde und das ain anderer, Ulrich Steurieth von Rinderfeldt berurtz mordts rechter theter, etzliche zeugen, so derselben lanndsarth gesessen, benennet und zu deren rechtlichen abhörung, compaßbrieff an ire obrigkeiten gebetten, wölches alles aber inen von mir abgeschlagen worden und die sachen irer personen halber dahin gerichtet seien, das solche angebotene purgation gentzlich hindan gesetzt und mit peinlicher frage gegen inen verfaren werden möchte. Und ferners, da e. ksl. Mt. in dero drittem und letzem kayserlichem schreiben bevelhen, wofern die sachen der juden antzaige gemeß beschaffen und derjenig, so für den theter angegeben und durch ernante zeugen und kundtschaften zubeweisen anerboten, unerwartet derselben kundtschaft volfürung auf bürgschaft aus verhaft gelassen worden, das ich bey meinen weltlichen rethen und bevelchhabern nochmals aigentliche verfügung thun, damit sie juden auf gleichmessige caution und bürgschaft irer so langwirigen haft widerumb on lengers verziehen auch erledigt, oder e\[ur\] ksl. Mt. gegrundte und erhebliche ursachen fürderlichst zuschreiben solte, wie dann dieselben beede e\[ur\] ksl. Mt. außgangene kayserliche schreiben fernern inhalts mit sich pringen thun.

Was nun erstlichs der juden angebotene purgation und beweysung irer berumbten unschuld, das auch ain anderer der theter des angezogenen mords sey, anlangt, will e\[ur\] röm. ksl. Mt. ich zu warhaftigem gegenbericht der sachen allerunderthenigst nit verhalten, obwol der gefangennen juden anwelde und sachbefurer sich anfengklichs gegen mir erboten und angemasst, der verhaften juden unschulde zu recht genugsamlich darzuthun und zubeweisen, und das ain anderer, nemlich Ulrich Seidenschwantz, der gleichwol in e\[ur\] ksl. Mt. schreiben Ulrich Steurieth genent würt, so seines handtwercks ein Hafner und derselben zeit zu Riderfelt gewonet, nachmals aber mit heyßlichem wesen alda weg und uf den weyler Strut genant, in meiner obrigkeit und zenth Rothingen gelegen, verruckt, des an dem beckenknaben begangen mordts schuldig und der rechte theter were, mit bit, das ich denselben angezeigten theter greifen, gefengklichen einziehen und daneben sie zu irer angeboten beweisung der gefangenen juden unschulde, das auch ermelter Seidenschwantz der theter des mordts seye, kommen und gelangen und solche kundtschaft uf iren aigen costen verhören lassen wölte.

Nachdem aber die gemelten anwelde und sachenfürer so vest und bestendiglich uf ir fürgeben, dasselbig zubeweisen und warzumachen gleichsam gepocht und in verharrung blieben sind, ungeachter allerhand fürgefallener und viler starcker hoher inditien und argwon, das der vilgemelt beckenknab, so von Hollenbach in Hohenloischer obrigkeit und seines alters ungeverlich umb die zwelf jar gewesen, allein von disen juden, sunderlich weil die eben zu der zeit umb und bey dem ort, die that des mords geschehen, auch sonst niemandts anderst gesehen worden und nit umb gelts willen, nachdem wissentlich, das er uber anderthalben patzen bey sich nicht gehabt, ermordt und umbpracht worden sein konden oder mögen. Alldieweil sich in beschehener besichtigung des todten cörpers warhaftiglich lauter erfunden, das demselben knaben auf der ainen seiten seines hals fast alle adern nur geschlitzt und nit durchstochen gewesen, daraus und sonderlich (weil man dessen ortz, da der mord geschehen, an des ermordten klaidern und uf der erden so wenig geplutz, das es neherlich zuspüren gewesen, befunden) anderst nit zugedencken noch abzunemen ist, dann das sein plut mit vleis gesammelt und aufgefangen worden sein musse.

Und uber das auch wol zuerzelen were, welcher massen des andern tags nach dem mord die gantzen gemeinden in beden dörfern zu Hollenbach und Alringen (zwischen denen ungeverlich in mittel des wegs uf dem veld die berürte mordthat geschehen) zusamen erfordert worden und ain jeder den todten corper des knabens anruren mussen, aber gantz ohn, das bey allen denselben ainich warzaichen erscheinen wöllen, sonder allein wie zu allerletzt die gefangenen juden darüber gefürt worden, und auch angreifen mussen, hat der todt cörpter sichtiglich angefangen allererst von frischen zu schweissen und pluten, welches e\[ur\] röm. ksl. Mt. ich anderer gestalt nit dann allein zu bericht der sachen dannoch allerunderthenigst unvermelt auch nit lassen sollen.

Wiewol ich nun uf solche allerhand bewegliche inditia auch andere eingenommene bericht und erkundigungen ursachen genugsam gehabt, gegen die verhaften juden mit strenger ernstlicher frage zuhandlen und verfaren zulassen. Damit aber ire sachenfürer und freundtschaften sich uber die hievor angebotenen und angemasten beweisung mit fugen nit beschweren, vil weniger beclagen solten, das hierinnen geferden gepraucht und die gefangenen unverhörter irer kundtschafft wider recht und die pilligkeit ubereilet worden weren, wie dann mein willen und gemuth nit ist, das sie oder andere, sie seien gleich christen, juden oder haiden, in ainem oder dem andern wege und sonderlich in peinlichen sachen, da es des menschen plut und leben gilt und betrifft, geferdet, vernachteilt oder ubereilet werden sollten, als mir auch solches gegen e\[ur\] röm. ksl. Mt. alls dem obristen haubt zuvorderst auch dem almechtigen Gott am jungsten gericht schwerlich zuverantworten stunde, so hab ich dennoch inen der juden sachfürern durch meine rethe und bevelchhabere mündtlich vermelden und anzaigen lassen, woferr sie fur 400 fl. purgschaft thun wurden, die that des mords uff den angezeigten und benenten theter zuerweisen und beyzubringen, wo sie aber solches nit erweisen wurden, das gegen rechtens in meinem stift gewertig sein wölten.  
Alßdann wolte ich bestellung thun lassen, das derselbig angezeugt theter den negsten zu verhaft pracht, darzu ire kundtschaften ordenlicher weise und uf iren costen, wie sie sich hievor selbst erboten und begert hetten, verhort werden solten. Ob nun wol uf solchen gegebenen bescheid die juden sich zu berurter fürgeschlagener burgschaft auch dieselben in fürgeschribner form samptlich und unverschaidenlich mit consens und bewilligung irer herrschaften und unter derselben ufgetruckten insigeln zuverfertigen und aufrichtig zumachen erboten, so haben doch die gemelten juden hernachmals die verfertigung solcher burgschaft nit allein selbsten zu verlengerung gespilt und darunter allerley auszug und einreden gesucht, sonder auch letzlich in derselben geferlicher weise enderung fürgenommen und die bürgschafft uf ire personen gesundert, darzu unter denselben burgern ainer nit sein herrschaft, sonder anstatt derselben ain andere adels person sigeln lassen. Umb welcher verlengerung, außzug, stunderung und geferlicher enderung willen ich verursacht worden, sie burgen gefengklich einziehen zulassen und so lang in verhaft zubehalten, biß sie die obgemelten burgschaft nach voriger irer selbsten bewilligung allerdings verfertigt und ubergeben, wie ich sie dann in acht tagen widerumb erledigen und von statten gelassen habe.  
Das aber die juden in irem supplicieren vor e\[ur\] ksl. Mt. angezeygt und fürgeben, das ich gegen ufrichtung solcher irer burgschaft nicht bewilliget haben sollte, die gefangenen juden los zulassen, welche ich doch hernacher mit herterer gefenknus und frage gegen denselben verfaren, darzu iren burgen nach dero entledigung mein stat Wirtzburg verbieten lassen und das uf verbitterlich anraitzen irer mißgünstigen die sachen der gefangenen halber zu noth vil beschwerlichern wegen geraichen möchte etc., an solchem allem, allergnedigster herr kayser, haben die supplicanten die lautern unwarhait und ungrund vor e\[ur\] ksl. Mt. vermeldet und angezeigt. Dann sie niemmermehr beybringen können noch werden, das ich mit ainichem wort inen vertrostung thun lassen nach ufrichtung vilberürter burgschaft die gefangenen juden irer verhaft zuerledigen, wie dann in ainer so hochwichtigen und vil verdechtigen sachen sich zuthun nit gepurt, vilweniger verantwortlich, noch das ich sie mit herterer gefengknus und banden jemals zubeschweren begert und peinliche tortur (dann was allein in der gute und mit betrohung geschehen) gegen denselben furgenommen habe, eben so wenig auch, das ich den burgen mein stat Wirtzburg zumeiden je verbieten, sunder allein den andern juden, so sie an sich gehenckt und fast teglich hiehero gelaufen, untersagen lassen, vermög hievoriger außgangener mandaten, sich hinfurdert gedachter meiner statt zuenteussern. Nichts destoweniger aber und vor verfertigung und ufrichtung obangeregter irer purgschaft und deren ubergebenen weysung articuln hab ich zu befürderung des handels den oftermelten angezaigten thetern, Ulrichen Seidenschwantzen, greifen und in mein verhaft zu Röttingen einziehen, auch denselben durch schickung und verordnung von meiner statt Wirtzburg aus umb des beruchtigten mords willen von stundan ernstlichen ansprechen und zureden setzen lassen; aber aus seiner aussag und angezeigten unschulde, auch andern eingenommenen berichten in dem wenigsten nit spüren noch erkenen konnen, das er solches angegebenen mords verdechtig noch schuldig sein kont oder möchte. Derwegen und als er etzliche tag in verhaft gelegen, auch die juden mit der burgschaft und iren weisung articuln die sachen selbsten verlengert und aufgehalten, ich uf seiner freundschaft underthenigs ansuchen nit umbgehen konden, zu abschneidung des teglichen uf ime laufenden uncostens ine Seidenschwantz uf burgschaft und widerstellung der gefengknus widerumb zuerledigen und anheimbs zu weib und kindern zulassen, wie er auch noch verhanden ist und mit nichten gespurt worden, das er mitler zeit noch zuvor zuweichen oder fues zuverrucken begert hette.

Das aber die juden, so solche des angegeben theters erledigung gehört und vermerckt, nachmals gleichmessige erledigung auf burgschaft bey mir auch gesucht und begert, hat mir nach gestalt und gelegenheit der sachen auf die gehabten erkundigungen auch abgemelten und andere mer erfundene scheinparliche starcke inditia auch allgemeinem geschrayhe und sage nit gebüren noch verantwurtlich sein wöllen, solchem irem suchen stat zuthun.

Und solches umb sovil desto merers, weil des ermordten beckenknabens leiblicher vatter, deßgleichen auch neben demselben der hochgeborn fürst, mein besonder lieber herr und freundt marggraff Geörg Friderich zu Brandenburg, auch die wittib und graven von Hohenloe mutter und söne, unter welcher herrschaft der beckenknab geborn und erzogen worden, mich umb administration der justitien hochlich und ernstlich ermanet und ersucht haben. Darumb die juden e\[ur\] röm. ksl. Mt. in ainem und dem andern mit ungrund berichtet, das sie jemals in diser sachen zugeferden und zuübereylen begert, nach das inen ir berumbte und angemasste beweisung, die ich gleichwol durch sie verfüren zulassen bedenckens gehabt, aber doch umb weniger mißverstandts und sorglichen betrugs willen derselben ainstheils allhie in meiner cantzley und die ubrigen bey meines herrn und freündts des teutschen maisters rethen zu Mergethaim durch ainen iren selbst darzu gegebenen und verordneten commissarien uf ire eingegebne weisung articul ordenlicher weise verhören zu lassen, bestallung gethan, aber das Mergethaimisch examen allererst mir uf Sambstag den letzten Septembris jungt anhero uberschickt worden und zukommen, doch aus anderen furgefallenen gescheften die sachen bißanhero in ruhe besten pliben ist, die aber nunmere zum fürderlichsten für hand genommen und nach erfindung zur gebure und billigkeit gehandelt und erörtert werden solle.  
Aus welchem obenerzelten meinem warhaftigen bericht, grund und ursachen e\[ur\] ksl. Mt. allergnedigist zuerkennen und abzunemmen, mit was fugen die juden mich vor derselben euer ksl. Mt. der geferden und übereylens, das ich auch sie zu irer erbottenen beweisung und purgation nit gelangen noch kommen lassen wöllen, beschuldiget und angeben haben, da ich doch, wo ich ir angemaste beweisung nit zuzulassen und der warheit und gerechtigkeit zu steuer uberflussig zuhören begert, sonder stracks mit peinlicher frage vorzufahren gesinnet gewesen, von dem ersten tag Junii jungstverschienen an, uf welchen sie zu gefengknus kommen und bißdahero ohne peinliche frage in verhafte behalten worden, die sachen gewißlich so lang nit gefeyert haben wolte.  
Es sollen aber e. röm. ksl. Mt. sich dessen allergnedigst zu mir versehen, das ich uf obberürte der juden kundtschaften und sunsten nach befindung der sachen anderst nichts handeln noch fürnemen lassen will, dann was e. ksl. Mt. auch derselben vorfahren beschribenen kayserlichen rechten und des heyligen Reichs ufgerichter constitution der peinlichen halßgerichts ordnung gemes und gleich ist, datzu mir vor Gott auch e\[ur\] ksl. Mt. und der welt zuverantwurten steet und sein würt. Welches euer röm. ksl. Mt. auf derselben allergnedigst begern ich zu grundtlichem warhaftigem bericht der sachen und meiner antwort in allerunderthenigster und schuldigster gehorsam nit sollen noch wöllen verhalten.  
Derselben mich und meinen stift aller unterthengst und zu genaden bevelhende. Datum in meiner statt Wirtzburg den vierzehenden Octobris anno 1570.  
\[...\]  
Fridrich bischoff zu Wirtzburg und herzog zu Francken.

**Publisher:** Haus-, Hof- und Staatsarchiv Wien \[HHStA\], Reichshofrat \[RHR\], Antiqua 1157, Nr. 4, unfol.  
**Archive:** Haus-, Hof- und Staatsarchiv Wien \[HHStA\], Reichshofrat \[RHR\], Antiqua 1157, Nr. 4, unfol.

<h2 style="text-align: center">Source 2 Original Text</h2><p style="text-align: center"><strong>Supplikation von Samuel Ullman aus Günzburg an Kaiser Ferdinand II. wegen Restitution ct. Landgraf Wilhelm zu Leuchtenberg<br>March 28, 1620</strong></p>

_Supplikation von Samuel Ullman aus Günzburg an Kaiser Ferdinand II. wegen Restitution ct. Landgraf Wilhelm zu Leuchtenberg, s. D. \[1620, March 28\], HHStA, RHR, Denegata Antiqua 177, fol. 128r-138v._

/fol. 129r/ \[...\] Allergnedigister herr.

Euer ksl. Mt. mit diesen meinen supplicirn allerunterthenigist zubehelligen werde ich wider meinen willen, zu dero alß von Gott und dem hl. römischen Reich verordneten höchsten obrigkait umb hulf und schuz anzufliehen und die mir unbillicher weiß zugefügte trangsal wider den durchleüchtigen hochgebornen fursten und herrn, herrn Wilhelm landtgraffen zu Leichtenberg, grafen zu Hauß gehorsamlich fürzutragen getrungen, allerunterthenigist bittendt, euer ksl. Mt. geruhen meine warhafte gravemina allergn. zuvernemen.

Demnach ich mich vor zwayen jahren auf ihre fstl. Gn. von Leüchtenberg zuemuhten und begehren nach Pfreimbt in deroselben schuz begeben, heußlichen nidergelaßen und nicht gar 4 wochen allda zugebracht, bin ich anfänglich von dem Leüchtenbergischen richter in ihre fstl. Gn. nahmen umb 50 fl. lehen weis auf 2 oder 3 tag angesprochen worden, dem dann unterthenig willfahret. Alß ich aber hernach umb widergeltung angemahnet, bin ich mit ainem schreiben an das ampt /fol. 129v/ Leichtenberg gewießen, die bezahlung aber allda mir ganz schimpflichen verwaigert und da ich solches bey ihr fstl. Gn. anzaigen und mahnen laßen, bin ich fur den landtgräflichen richter erfordert, die anmahnung und begehrte restitution allerdings verwiesen, darbey auch auß ihr fstl. Gn. befelch 100 fl. straff auferlegt und zugleich die 50 fl. fur lehen inbehalten und solche unzeitige auferlegte strafen von mir notrungenlich entrichtet worden.

Zum andern haben ihre fstl. Gn. zu Leüchtenberg bey mir kram und allerley handelswahren (damit ich dann gehandelt) zu unterschidlichen mahlen neben etlichen baar fürgeliehenen gelt, so sich auf 700 fl. außweiß richtiger rechnung erstrecket, außgeborget.

Drittens haben hochgedachte ihre fstl. Gn. fur dero bey sich habende dienerin Dorothea von Nürnberg genannt, ain baar guldene armbänder per 28 fl. außgeborget, so alles biß dato noch unbezahlt ausstendig verblieben.

Demnach zum vierten weylandt ihre fstl. Gn. gemahlin ungefahr zway jahr vor ihrem sel. abschaiden zwo silberne flaschen zu Prag bey ainem golldtschmidt in dem judengäßlin beywesendt meines weibs angefrümbet, darauf ettlich alt silber eingeben, hingegen bey ainem juden umb ettlich /fol. 130r/ 80 fl. krahm wahren auf borg außgenommen, dagegen ime goldtschmidt zum bürgen und selbst geltner gesezt der vertröstung mehrer silber zu beförderung der flaschen auch abzahlung der schulden schleinig nachzuschicken. Ist jedoch solche, ungeachtet ihre fstl. Gn. sel. andenckens noch anderthalb jar im leben gewesen, alles biß dato nunmehr bey drey ganzen jahren verblieben, also der goldtschmidt burgenrecht laisten mußen und meinem weib, ungeachtet sie bey ainem oder andern contract weder mittel person noch bürign worden, sondern gleich ainer dienerin beygewohnet, nichts desto weniger 200 fl. fur solch dem goldtschmidt vertrauet silber, so nicht 8 fl. wehrt gewesen, iezo in wehrender meiner ehe strafenweiß auferleget, auch ihr fstl. Gn. notzwannglich bezahlt worden.

Wie nicht weniger fürs funfte eben umb selbige zeit mein schwehr Moyses nunmehr sel. umb gnedig erlößung solcher strafen auß obgedachten ursachen unterthenig gebeten, mit vermelden, das solches alles ehe und mann seine tochters zu mir geheuratet fürgangen, sie ihres thails im wenigisten nicht betreffen, dahero besorglichen zwischen mir und ihr widerwertigkeit und unfridt entstehen möchten, nicht desto weniger 50 fl. ihr fstl. Gn. /fol. 130v/ wegen meines weibs zugeben sich unterthenig erboten und baar aufgelegt hat, hat solches gar kein verfanng haben wöllen, sonndern haben ihre fstl. Gn. solche 50 fl. genommen, nichts destoweniger hernach durch seinen gewesten hoffmaistern Hannß Sigmunden von Tieg, seinen schreibern, landtgräflichen richtern und zwayen ampt oder statt dienern in meines schwechern hauß fallen, daßelbig nicht allein verwahren, sondern auch alle seine versperrte kisten und kästen zu öffnen zwingen, daraus all sein schazgelt an goldt und silber zugleich auch alle versezte fstl. und adeliche guldene pfandt ring und clainodien uber die 500 fl. wehrt, uber diß und besonderlich ainen guldenen mit diamant und rubinen versezten gnadenpfennig, ainem furstlichen Fohenstrauß gehörig, wie nicht weniger ain silberne vergulte gürtel, so 38 lot gewogen, deßgleichen ainen corallnen pater noster oder rosarium, daran ain silberne quasten und ain guldener mit ainem diamant versezter rinng ainem pupillen oder waißen zuständig, umb deßen restitution ich selbsten zum öfftern beclagt worden, nemen laßen, und bißhero alles behalten. Darbey es auch nicht verblieben, sondern ist obgedachter mein schwecher selbigen tag fur den stattrichter erfordert, /fol. 131r/ auß fstl. befelch angezaigt, wie ihre fstl. Gn. wahres wißens, daß er an baarschaft auch sonsten reich, auch zweifels ohne auß mißtrauen sein furnehmstes vermögen außer der barschaft an frembde ort geflehet hette, derentwegen 1000 fl. straff innerhalb 8 tagen zuerlegen und zugeben auferlegt. Darbey auch diß befohlen worden, weiln mein schwecher ain versezt pfanndt per 76 fl., so den Strinlingen ihr fstl. Gn. gewesten stallmaistern zuständig, bey handen solches deroselben gegen abzug der 1000 fl. zuzustellen, wie geschehen, aber nichts destoweniger hat mein schwecher die auferlegte 1000 fl. unabgezogen der 76 fl. pfandts unverschuldter sachen gegeben und bezahlen mußen.

Zum sechsten als ihr fstl. Gn. herr dechant ungefähr 3 monat nach oberzehlten fall bey 100 claffter seines aigenen hollzes allenthalben so woln den benachtbarten churpfälzischen alß landtgräfischen ohne ain herrschaftliche inquisition oder verbot verkauft, und ich davon auch 9 claffter an mich keuflichen gebracht, haben mich mehr hochgedachte ihre fstl. Gn. unter dem schein, wie ihme herrn dechant holz zuverkaufen nicht gebührt hette, umb 50 fl. gestraft, dargegen alle andere landtgräfliche /fol. 131v/ frey gelaßen worden.

Ferners zum sibenden alß ungefähr vor ainem halben jahr mein schwecher die schuldt der natur bezahlet und verstorben, haben sich ihr fstl. Gn. wider alt herkommen und gebrauch alle verlassenschaft fur sich selbsten de facto verpettschieren zulaßen unterfangen, alß ich aber umb relaxation unterthenig gebeten, ist mir durch frau hofmaisterin vertreulich zur antwortt erfolget, daß gegen ainer verehrung ihr fstl. Gn. (quod notatur) die relaxation erfolgt werden soll. Darzu ich mich unterthenig und willig erboten, allain darbey gebeten, mir nur so lang mein schwager alß mitterb auß Böhaimb hero gelange, gn. dilation zugeben. Demnach die gebetene dilation gnedig bewilliget, und mein schwager eben in der charwochen ankommen, also ich mit der versprochenen verehrung wegen der heiligen zeit damals hinterhalten, haben ihre fstl. Gn. mich abermals mit unzeitigen strafen zubelegen ursachen gesucht, den dritten Ostertag erfordern und in 8 tagen 1000 fl., wegen inventirens 500 fl., dann wegen meines schwagers erbportion nachsteuer 500 fl., zubezahlen ernstlichen auferlegen laßen. Ob ich nun wohln darwider ganz unterthenig gebeten und furgewendet, /fol. 132r/ wie solches wider alt herkommen und im ganzen römischen Reich nit gewönlich oder breuchlich, daß man den landtsfurstlichen herrschaften umb inventirens willen aine solche grosse oder geringere summa zuraichen schuldig, wurden demnach bey gestalt dißes falls ihre fstl. Gn. der auferlegten 500 fl. nachsteuer willen nach noch der zeit, wie hoch sich das vermögen erstrecken möchte, wißen könndte, ernstlichen zubeharren nicht gemaint sein, auf unverhofft fall aber ernstlichen beharrens oder mir und meinen miterben nit zuwider, daß so umb die nachsteuer anlanget, von den gegen schuldten damit ihre fstl. Gn. in die erbschaft (so viel alß uber 3000 fl. betreffendt), verhaftet, gnedig abgekürzt und einbehalten werden möchte. So hab ich doch bey ihr fstl. Gn. nichts erlangen können, sondern haben mir noch uber solches 500 fl. strafweis auferlegt, auch umb schleiniger bezahlung willen ire fstl. Gn. ainen stock in sein hauß in der vorstatt im garten unter freyem himmel mich und meinen schwagern ungeachtet die bestimbte zeit der 8 tagen sich nicht geendet, sondern mir 4 tag geschloßen gewesen, biß die bezahlung wurcklich gelaistet, darinnen mit handen und füssen versperrt zuhalten, aufrichten lassen. Aber mit höchsten /fol. 132v/ flehentlichen bitten, grosser muhe und arbeit 3 tag dilation erlanget, alß ich abermals ganz unbillich unverschuldter weiß die auferlegte 1500 fl. laider gelten und bußen mußen.

Schließlich und hauptsachelichen kan euer ksl. und kgl. Mt. ich allerunterthenigist nit verhallten, wie daß kurz verwichener zeit und eben damals, alß das Manßfeldische kriegsvolck nach Böhaim durch die Churpfallz und landtgrafschafft Leüchtenberg ihren durchzug genommen, herrn landtgrafens hochfstl. Gn. sich nit anhaimbs gehallten noch verharret, dahero auß forcht nit allein alle ihre fstl. herrn regiments rähte, sondern auch burger und unterthanen sich, so guter ihnen möglich geweßen, mit kindern und gütern zu salviren mittel gesucht. Darzu ich dann nicht unzeitig gleichermaßen bewogen und getrungen worden, mich und die meinigen nach besten vermögen biß auf ihrer fstl. Gn. von Leichtenberg glücklichen anhaimbskunften (doch alles mit vorwißen und bewilligung furstlichen landtgrävischen herrn regiments räthen) auf vorhergangene churfstl. Pfalzisch gn. theil glaidt, so viel mir in fürgefallener /fol. 133r/ eyl raum werden können, in sicher gewahrsam zubegeben, und viel ansehentlichen so furstlichen alß adels und andern personen die Leüchtenbergischer jurisdiction zu Hannß Adam von Sparneck auf Troißnitz Churpfäzlischen lanndtsässen geflohen. Alß ich aber auß Manßfeldischen volcks durchzug, wie andere mehr, nachdem ihre hochfstl. Gn. von Leichtenberg widerumb zu landt kommen, mich auch zu hauß gefunden, inmittels aber mit besagten Sparnecker bey dem Churpfalzischen hoffgericht dieses depositi halben auß erheblichen ursachen und darumb, weiln meine zu truz in verwahrung deponirte pfandt sich geringert befunnden, erst und anfanglich extraiudicialiter, dann und hernach in rechtfertigung erwachsen, hierdurch Sparnecker mich aller höchst betrohet, auch ehe und wann ich clagbar worden, ungescheücht verlauten laßen, daß wofern ich ihme bey ihr churfstl. Gn. alß seiner unwidersprechlichen landtsfurstlichen obrigkait beclagen werde, er mich bey ihr hochfstl. Gn. von Leichtenberg dermassen (es beschehe gleich mit wahr oder unwahrheit) wi mit notarien und unverwerfflichen zeugen zuerweisen, hinein hauen und verklainern wollen, daß ich die händt ob dem kopff zusammen /fol. 133v/ schlagen soll, mit dem anhang, wo ihme dißfals mißlinge, er mich mit ainem carbiner außzahlen wollen; wie dann geschehen und ich laider bey meiner haimkunft von menniglichen der statt (euer ksl. und kgl. Mt. sey eß schmerzlichen geklaget) hören mussen, daß ihre hochfstl. Gn. mit höchsten ungnaden wider mich gesessen, welches dann der außgang geben, in dem er thails seinen hochfstl. burgern und andern unterthanen ire mir außständige schleinige bezahlung inhibirt und geschenckt. Demnach auch Sparnecker seine getreue andichtung ins werck gericht, mit furwendung, wie ihre fstl. Gn. sambt bey sich habenden dienerin, Dorothea von Nurnberg, ich ganz verklainert nachgeredt hette, welche doch in ewigkait nicht erweisen kan, daß ich mich solcher falscher auflagen hette gelusten laßen. Nichts destoweniger seindt ihre fstl. Gn. alßbald unverhörter sachen zugefahren, nicht allein mich besonders in den schloßthurm, mein weib aber, die schwieger uber 70 jahr, zugleich acht kinder, drunter ain kinndt 3 jährig, daß annder 19 und das 3. mehr 12 wochen allt neben zwayen mägden in die ampt oder scherchenstueben /fol. 134r/ alles unversehens legen lassen, sondern auch bemelte meine alt verlebts schwiger, weib und zwo töchter, iede besonders, ob nicht gelt oder geldts wehrt bey ihnen zufinden, allerdings entblößen und besuchen laßen. Alß aber bey meiner schwieger nur bey 20 kr. gefunden, hat ihr solche der ampts richter nehmen wollen, aber doch auf ihr flehentliches bitten gelaßen worden. Inmittelst aber ich und die meinigen ieder verhaft 31 tag gefänglich gehalten und mit 2 personen, gleich hochsträflichen malefiz personen mit unerträglichen schweren uncosten verwahret worden, seindt landtgrävischer hofmaister Kürnreuther ampts richter und andere in mein hauß eingefallen, alles geöffnet, goldt, gelt, clainodien, silber geschmeidt und geldts wehrt, so maistentheils pupilen, adels und andern furnehmen personen versezte unterpfandt gewesen, wie nicht weniger mein und meines schwecher schuldtbucher, alle verhandene brieff, auch zugleich seinen von sich gegebenen schuldtbrief und alle meine khram und handelßwahren, item über die 300 fl. wehrt allerley weiß leinen haußgewandt zu sich ins schloß genommen. Auch deßelbigen tags zu /fol. 134v/ mitternacht widerumb 9 sonderbahr personen ins hauß geschickt, was übrig gefunden, hinwegknemen, thails meiner gehabten kram wahren seinen gesindlein und obgeachter seiner dienerin geschenckt, und darein klaiden lassen, darbey auch nit ersettigt gewesen, sondern hat uber alles solches noch der zu folgenden tags nicht allein mein, sondern zugleich auch meines schwechers hauß durch die ampt und statt diener durchgraben und ob nichts verborgen suchen laßen, ja das wol schmerzlich zuvernehmen, daß ihr fstl. Gn. stattliche herrschaftliche angenommene pfandt und clainodien dero dienerin geschenckt, so sie noch zu stundt zum höchsten despect deroselben offentlich antragen. Bey welchem eß noch nit verblieben, sondern haben ihr fstl. Gn. auch uber alles solches mich noch darzu in 4 unterschiedliche gefängnus stecken, und anzaigen laßen, daß wofern ich meinen schaz und waß geflehet worden, nicht anzaigen, daß hergeben werde, ich dem scharpfrichter untergeben und mit dem strang am leben gestraft werden soll. Dagegen ich mich höchster warheit entschuldiget, daß mir in so harter verhaft schärfsten thurmgefängnus bey gestalt /fol. 135r/ der sachen, daß mir vorhin all mein hab und gut, schuldtbucher und brief, pfandt, khram und handelswahren neben aller haußfahrnus mit gewalt genommen, alß weren mir ohne vorher gangene erledigung bey iemandt viel oder wenig gelt aufzubringen unmuglich. Auß solcher er meinen schwager unterm schein mit mir rähtlich zu werden, wie gelt aufzubringen sein möchte, durch den ampt oder stattdiener zu mir fuhren und mit gewalt in den thurm von ihnen werfen laßen, welches zuvor unerhörten process mannß und weibs personen, so nicht zusammen gehörig, in ain so finster verborgen abscheuliche gefängnus ohn alle schamhaftigkeit zuverhinderung natürlicher schuldigkeit gesambt zuthun, und 3 ganzer tag gehalten zu werden, wie mit höchsten schmerzen betrauret und beklaget haben. Inmittelst deßen ist mein weib mit ihren klein unschuldigen noch seugenden kindern von ihr fstl. Gn. außgeschaft und umb sich zubewerben, wie auch auferlegt worden, alle ihre fstl. Gn. von sich gegebenen obligation, schuldtbrief und zettel, sich uber 3500 fl. nur die hauptsumma gerechnet, zu cassirn und noch daruber 3000 fl. an baarem gelt zur straff geben /fol. 135v/ soll. Obnunwol mein weib die begehrte obligation ihre fstl. Gn. zugestellet, die er sobaldt zerrißen, seindt sie doch damit noch nit ersettigt geweßen, sondern aufgehalten und sein mir inmittelst wehrender dieser meiner verhaft 2 schuldtzettel, so ich gegen empfangenen pfandten die ihre fstl. Gn. auß meinem hauß zu sich genommen, zugeschriben, wie weit sich die schuldten gegen den pfandten sambt zinsen erstrecken, anzuzaigen, alles ernnsts einbefohlen und hernach solche pfandt auß ihre fstl. Gn. händen redimirt, daß loßgelt aber von ihne behalten worden. Am 3. tag alß ich und mein schwiger im thurm gelegen, irer fstl. Gn. cammer diner, stattrichter, amptdiener, nachrichter und sein knecht zu mir in die gefängnus geschickt und zum beschlus angezaigt worden, daß wofern ich nicht die 3000 fl. gellt baar geben werde, mir hiemit ain peinlicher rechtstag angestellt sey und die execution dreyen tagen würcklich vollzogen werden soll. Hierauf ich meines guten gewißens wahrer unschuldt getröstet und zur antwort worden, ob mir woln nicht bewust, waß und wieviel mein weib entlehnet haben möge, so sey doch uhrbittig und gewiß auf /fol. 136r/ den fall ich zu ihr persönlich kommen, sie dahin vermögen köndte, alles zu neuer erledigung von sich geben werde. Auf solches haben ihr fstl. Gn. durch dero richtern und zwayen ambtsknechten an die churfstl. grenz mich ungebunden, dann ich kein malefiz person gewesen, auf freyen fuß gehen laßen und in die Pfalz geliefert, der hoffnung von ihr meinem weib mehrers außzupreßen. Weil aber nichts vorhanden, und ich auf churfurstlichen grunden gestellt gewesen, bin ich diß dahero gn. gedultet worden.

Wann dann allergn. kayser, könig und herr die sachen oberzelter maßen also und anderst nicht in höchster warheit beschaffen, dann daß ich mein schwecher, schwager, schwiger, weib und kindern ganz unverschulder weiß von mehrhochgedachter fstl. Gn. von Leichtenberg nit allein ohn alle verschuldt in den zwayen jahren härtiglichen gefängnust worden, sondern auch wie oben von puncten zu puncten wahrhaftig specificirt (auch noch zur stundt alles zuerweisen alle mein hab und gut, benebens und zugleich alle und iede versezte pfandt, so nit mir sondern thails fstl., thails adelichen und andern /fol. 136v/ furnemen personen zuständtig, neben den schuldtbuchern, kram und handelßwahren und haußfahrnus zu sich genommen.  
Dahero mir nun den oppignoranten die restitution der von ihr fstl. Gn. abgenommenen pfandten zulaisten nit müglich, sondern so fern von euer ksl. und kgl. Mt. ich wider allerunterthenigste hoffnung hulfloß gelaßen werden, solt, mit meinem weib und armen kleinen unschuldigen 8 kindern am bettelstab gedeyen und das elendt bauen muste, ja weder ich noch die meinigen von ihnen leibs noch lebens sicher sein könnden, also gelanget und ist an euer ksl. und kgl. Mt. mein allerunterthenigist, demuhtigist, flehentlich anrufen und bitten, die geruhen alß von dem allmechtigen ain hocherleuchter kayser und höchste obrigkeit, liebhaber u. förderer der gerechtigkeit alle oberzehlte umbständt gn. zu beherzigen und von höchster herrschaft wegen verfugung zuthun, damit mir zuförderist von ihr fstl. Gn. herrn landtgrafen nit allein alle und iede abgenommene schuldtbucher, pfandt, baar gelt, abgetrungene gelt, strafen, kram und handelswahren, deßgleichen auch alle /fol. 137r/ haußfahrnus unverlendt restitutirt, seine gegen mir haftende schulden uber welches ain obligation von mir abgenöttiget worden, förderlich entrichtet und wurcklich eingehendiget, auch ich und alle die meinigen wider gewallt von ihr fstl. Gn. und menniglichen seinetwegen genuegsam versichert sein und bleiben, sondern auch meine noch verhaft alt verlebte schwiger und kinder der unverschulden harten gefengnus widerumb auf freyem fues gelaßen, benebens seinen unterthanen, so mir mit schulden behafftet, an sichern orten außer Leichtenbergischen herrschaften zur zahlung ernstlich angehalten werden mögen. Damit eur ksl. und kgl. Mt. ich neben aller christlichen obrigkeit sein herrn landtgrafen furstliche Gn. an mir und den meinigen verubte mit der that allergnedigst spuren und vernemen mögen, so bitte ich nochmals allerunterthenigst, weiln ihr fstl. Gn. von Leichtenberg vor diesem ksl. Mt. hochlöblichist, christmildristen angedenckens keinen befehls parirn, derowegen eur ksl. und kgl. Mt. die geruhen umb Gottes und deß göttlichen willen, zugleich eine /fol. 137v/ commission förderlichst allergnedigst zuverordnen, damit allerunterthenigist gebettenermassen in ainem und andern puncten mir zu dem ich rechtlich befugt, wurckhlich verholfen werden möge, in allergnedigster betrachtung, daß nit allein ich, sondern auch vor mir meine eltern und vorfahren sich uber die 100 jahr hinter dem hochlöblichisten hauß Österreich in der marggrafschaft Burgau verharret, unclagbar aufgehalten haben, wie nun gerechtigkeit befördert, allso will eur ksl. und kgl. Mt. umb mittheilung derselben allerunterthenigst angerufen, benebenst zu dero gn. gewährlichen resolution darauf ich mit höchstem verlangen unterthenigst hoffen thue, auch oberherrschaftlichen schuz und obacht mich allerunterthenigst gehorsambst befohlen haben.

\[...\]  
Samuel jud von Kindsberg.  
**Archive:** HHStA, RHR, Denegata Antiqua 177, fol. 128r-138v.