---
title: "Rome, 1571: A Body and a Murder Investigation in the Ghetto"
author: Serena di Nepi
institution: Sapienza Università di Roma
volume: 10
year: "2013"
slug: rome-murder-investigation-ghetto
event:
  name: "Early Modern Workshop: Jewish History Resources"
  theme: Jews and Violence in the Early Modern Period
language:
  - Italian
publication_location:
  - Rome
description: "The 1571 story of Sabato del Corsetto tells about violence in the
  Roman ghetto in the second half of Sixteenth Century. It concerns many issues
  related to violence: family violence; verbal violence; physical violence;
  violence among women; violence arisen both for economic and personal reasons
  and even attempt made by the Jewish community to manage violence and violent
  people."
---
<h2 style="text-align: center">Introduction</h2>

The story of Sabato del Corsetto tells about violence in the Roman ghetto in the second half of Sixteenth Century. It concerns many issues related to violence: family violence; verbal violence; physical violence; violence among women; violence arisen both for economic and personal reasons and even attempt made by the Jewish community to manage violence and violent people.

Criminal Sources in Early Modern Rome:

The story is developed by three different primary sources, all written by the offices of the Criminal Court of Papal Rome at the end of 1571 (august 1571 – February 1572). The first two concern two different trials while the last one comes from the register of Investigations made by the same Court. In Early Modern Justice, real trials were final steps of a longer proceeding beginning in various ways included anonymous denunciation and police investigation. People could be imprisoned and questioned about a crime out of a trial, in a preliminary phase called _Costituti_, which means “Questions on a crime”. Only some of these examinations resulted in judicial proceedings in a court: we have dozens of registers of _Costituti_ for any year and just few trials related to these. During the examination, questions were in Latin and answers in ancient Italian. Sentences represented another problem for the historians: even if all trials reached an end, just a few parts of these conclusions were recorded as single sentence. The most of them were just noted in registers of general administrative acts made by the same Offices (called _Registrazioni d’atti_), among many other issues, and it’s necessary to look carefully pages and pages to discover what happened to the indicted.

The trial against Sabato (1571): a violent Jewish Society

Sabato turned himself to the court on October 15, 1571 to clarify his non- involvement in the death of Rubbino Rossetto, an old rabbi, whose corpse was found in the ghetto, early in the morning on an unprecised day at the beginning of August 1571. Sabato was immediately suspected of the murder for two main reasons. On one hand, many witnesses attested he was involved in a violent quarrel just the night before and – as they said - it was possible that he deathly hit the old rabbi when he run furiously after another Jew, Sciolomon Siciliano. On the other hand, he was really unpopular and his enemies regarded to this brawl as an opportunity to take revenge on him. As he told to the court, in the last years he had argued with other Jews on job questions, which could be solved only thanks to some external interference. Sabato began to pick up dead horses as a certain Angelo Funaro previously did. So Angelo assaulted him and Sabato went to the Vicario to denounce Angelo. At the moment of this trial, Sabato and Angelo were partners in a company: this means that by anyway, probably after a private agreement ordered by Jewish arbiters, Angelo e Sabato were forced to put away their problems and work together. Of course, Angelo wasn’t happy of this solution.

During his examination, Sabato tried to depict himself as a good guy but his precedents didn’t help him to fulfill the task. Not only he had been imprisoned many times formerly but he had also disappeared for months at the beginning of this investigation. His narrative was centered on the representation of a victim: he had been ill, Jewish people are “sad” (bad people), he was poor, he had no enemies but a lot of people hate him (included the famous Jewish notary Pompeo del Borgo). Nonetheless, his violent attitude emerged from his own words and for this he attempted to dilute his behavior in a general violent contest, where a women brawl was usual as a job fight, a stabbing and threatening ?someone with a gun. There weren’t evidences against Sabato apart from the ghetto gossip. He confirmed his deposition even under torture and he was freed on October 30.

A Jewish gang: social and psychological violence in the ghetto

Just few months later, on February, Sabato was again in the same prison, this time to witness against a group of Jews. His own trial concerned physical violence while this second action reported on psychological and social violence. It was a case of bullying, where unconscious Jews used Christian institution to make money in prejudice of other Jews. If the murder investigation was the opportunity for some of elder Sabato’s enemies to punish him after job questions, this one was his occasion to get even. It was the custody of a young man, found in a neophyte’s home out of the ghetto during the night, to let the investigation begin. Suddenly the “birri” (policemen) revealed an incredible story where, in order to forgive gambling debts, a Jewish gang was used to steal stuff in the home of the wealthy people of the ghetto on Shabbat evening. As the examinations went on, it was clear that the gang was the author of a growing number of malefactions, included the one on which Sabato vouched that concerned a racket on false witnesses.

As this second trial attested, interlaced interests and networks crossed the ghetto and it was not easy to survive among these. Ancient aversions, rudeness, unfairness, fierce competition in a so limited job market were all element of daily life for Jewish people in Rome. They were used to crash against other Jews for a huge number of reasons. The judicial adventures of Sabato del Corsetto reveal how frequent were both those violent brawls and the consequent imprisonment. Just to speak on his past, Sabato was involved at least in four quarrels (that included a death, a stabbing and a gun shot) and he was captured four times (illegal trade, false witnesses etc....). It’s hard to live together, sharing little spaces and concurring for the same (few works). This condition was a perfect habitat for daily violence, as the story of Sabbato confirms.

Remaining Jews in Counter Reformation Rome

In Counter-Reformation Rome, there was an easy way to escape from this ugly condition and it was, of course, conversion to Christianity.  
It’s important to remember that both these trials could have ended with a baptism. Sabato stayed out of the ghetto for days after the discovery of Rubino’s corpse. The _birri_ looked for him in the Jewish quarter unsuccessfully until he decided to present to the judges. During all this time, he remained in Rome, probably in some Christian or neophyte’s home. He recalled this period during his examination as a proof of his innocence: «I told the truth and so God helped me because I didn’t sin; If I was guilty, I should flew away to Turkey or to some other places » \[_Io ho detto la verita et cosi Dio mi aiuto come non ho peccato et se io fossi stato me ne saria andato in Turchia o in qualche altro loco_\]. While Sabato thought to Ottoman Turkey as a safer place, it should be underlined that he never referred to the House of Catechumens, which represented a closer and easier solution to all his problems. The same was for the Jews of the gang, despite their dangerous connections with neophytes. The leaders were sentenced to exile and nobody choose to convert even in this case.

The story of Sabato offers two clues to reflect on the Roman Jews resistance to conversion. As he said, his job quarrel with Angelo Funaro (against whom he vouched in the second trial) was resolved in the ghetto: «Now I’m in their company for the next two years and we have to be in company». This short sentence means that the two parts came to an agreement after the denunciation to the Vicario and that this agreement was signed inside the Jewish society (otherwise Sabato should have told to the judges the name of the Christian notary that wrote the act as usual in such cases). They weren’t friends but they had to keep calm and the Jewish institutions worked to establish a kind of peace inside the ghetto.

The memorandum of the discovery of money in Rubino’s home tells something more on this politic. It was written few days after the death, while Sabato was lost out of the ghetto and police was still investigating on the murder. The note doesn’t mention these topics. It concerns tension between the representatives of _Gemilut Hasadim_ and Rubino’s heirs, at the beginning on the possibility to find something in the home, than on the right division of the treasure. At least, it refers to the way to diffuse this tension, entrusting the management of the money to an important Jewish banker as Angelo di Capua and informing Christian authority about the fact only after its peaceful solution.

Roman society was violent and Jews were as violent as Christians. Brawls blew up frequently and involved Jews both in contrast with other Jews and against Christians. We had many _Costituti_ on fights in Roman market places were some Jews played a role, but this isn’t our point. Violence inside the ghetto walls was more dangerous for the Jewish community that the other one, just under the eye of Christian Courts. Jewish society tried to govern itself despite its inner violence, using any tool to run the people of the ghetto, from internal agreement to the clever use of Christian juridical system. Sometimes it succeeded, sometimes it failed but it’s important to investigate the ways they used to manage themselves in the long ghetto era.