---
title: Absconding and Chasing Across the Western Sephardic Diaspora
author: Daniel Strum
institution: University of São Paulo
volume: 15
year: "2018"
slug: absconding-chasing-western-sephardic-diaspora
event:
  name: "Early Modern Workshop: Jewish History Resources"
  theme: Space and Identity
  date:
    start: 2018-08-15
    end: 2018-08-16
language:
  - English
  - Spanish
tags:
  - absconding
  - Sephardic diaspora
  - Amsterdam
  - Oporto
  - Portuguese Inquisition
description: Traveling in the Western Sephardic diaspora often raised questions
  among their creditors whether the purpose of a travel was really for
  legitimate business interests or an attempt to abscond with their funds. By
  analyzing sources from Portuguese Inquisition files, and notarial records from
  both Amsterdam and Oporto, this presentation examines the tension between
  legitimate and illegitimate mobility within the diaspora, and widespread
  surveillance of debtors across long distances.
sections:
  - {}
footnotes:
  - {}
bibliography:
  - {}
---
### Oporto and Lisbon, Portugal, and Amsterdam, the Netherlands

**SR Nr. 461** - Protest of non-payment of a bill of exchange in the name of Gaspar
Sanches to Garcia Gomes de Vitoria.

1611, February 10
*Not. Arch. 123, fol. 79-79v., Not. Jan Fransz Bruyningh.*

Garcia Gomes de Vitoria, drawee, receives from Gaspar Sanches, payee, a protest
of a bill of exchange drawn in Antwerp on January 23, 1611 by Andre de Azevedo
for an amount of 102. 10. – p. Flem., to be paid after sight, the value received from
Jan de Vooz. Vitoria accepted the bill of exchange on January 27, 1611 and
declares to be willing to pay as soon as the distrain levied on the money by a few
Portuguese merchants, will have been withdrawn. The notary registers a protest
because complaints against the arrest should have been lodged with the judgement
seat. Also, Vitoria registers a protest.

**SR Nr. 571** - General power of attorney of Garcia Gomes Vitoria in Amsterdam to
Abraham Pelt, merchant in Amsterdam to look after his affairs during the period of
his stay in Emden and Hamburg.

1612, September 4.
*Not. Arch. 375, fol. 483-484v., Not. Nicolaes and Jacob Jacobs*

**SR Nr. 572** - Abandonment of Garcia Gomes Vitoria to Arnout Cobbaut Junior
and Anthoni van Diemen of insured goods loaded in the ship "Na. Sra. de Nazare".

1612, September 11.
*Not. Arch. 375, fol. 498, Not. Nicolaes and Jacob Jacobs.*

Garcia Gomes Vitoria in Amsterdam, notifies Arnout Cobbaut Junior and Anthoni
van Diemen, insurers, that he abandons to them the goods they insured for a
journey from Brazil to Oporto with the ship "Na. Sra. de Nazaré" of skipper
Miguel da Rua from Miragaia, since the ship was seized by privateers.

**ADP, NOT, PO2, l. 36, fols. 62-63 (1612-10-8):**

Gaspar Marcos Mendes made and granted enough powers of attorney to Francisco
Mendes Medeiros and to Cristovão Mendes, his brother, residents in Amsterdam,
to allow both together or any one *in solidum* charge and collect all his debts
[credits] and goods from any person and people, who owe him anything by any
way be it money, goods from any sort, quantity and quality; and from everything
they will charge and collect, any of them may give releases and quittances, public
and private, in the manner that should be asked or needed for the security of the
people and all will have the same strength in and out of court as if the grantor had
received [the amount], given and signed them all; and he, Gaspar Marcos, said that
empowered them in the aforesaid manner specially and expressly to charge and
collect, and have in their hands, from Garcia Gomes, Portuguese resident in those
parts of Amsterdam or wherever he might be, four consignments of goods that he,
the grantor, had shipped from this city, and which are worth, in truthful and net
account, 511,274 réis. In addition, 110 pounds Flemish that he [Garcia Gomes]
collected from insurances. If his attorneys, or any of them, are to receive the
aforesaid amounts, or any part of them, the may give to the said Garcia Gomes all
the releases and quittances.

**ADP, NOT, PO2, l. 36, fols. 63v.-64v. (1612-10-8):**

Gaspar Marcos Mendes presented a power of attorney granted by Pedro Nunes
Xabe, a resident of Torre de Moncorvo, registered there on February 16, 1611,
which empowered Dr. Manuel Barretos, Alvaro Nunes, apothecary, João Martins,
son of Marcos Martins, all of them residents of Torre de Moncorvo, as well as
Gaspar Marcos Mendes, a merchant, resident of Porto. He empowered them to
claim and demand all his rights in court or not, in all his causes, either already filed
or to be filed in the future, charge and collect everything due or pertaining to him.
Gaspar Marcos Mendes substituted the powers granted to him onto the brothers
Francisco Mendes Medeiros and Cristovão Mendes, of Amsterdam, and Garcia
Gomes Vitoria “senior” and Domingos Lopes Vitoria, of Porto, in order to to
charge from Garcia Gomes, resident in the said Amsterdam, or wherever he might
live or be found, both from him and from his goods, wherever these might be,
*scilicet*, the content of a bill of exchange worth 1,306 cruzados that he [Garcia
Gomes] drew against the sum received from Pedro Nunes Xabe on Fernão Gomes
and Diogo Gomes, residents in this city [Oporto], and on him substituting attorney,
Gaspar Marcos Mendes, the said bill of exchange goes protested and re-exchanged; and to allow them also to charge from him, Garcia Gomes, or from his goods
1,197,572 réis, which he, Gaspar Marcos Mendes, remitted for the account of the
said Pedro Nunes Xabe; they may in both *in rem propriam* and [each] *in solidum*
charge in the best possible way both amicably or judicially, and all that they are to
receive they should give all the releases and quittances, public or private, that
might be requested and necessary as if he the substituting attorney or the grantor
Pedro Nunes Xabe were present, and he substituted his powers also onto Garcia
Gomes Vitoria [senior], citizen of this city and onto Domingos Lopes Vitoria,
residents thereof, with the aforesaid powers to all of them ad *in solidum*. So, he
wished and granted.

**ADP, NOT, PO2, l. 36, fols. 82v.-83 (1612-10-27):**

Domingos Lopes Vitoria empowered Manuel Lopes Nunes, resident of
Amsterdam, and the Licentiates Onofre de Brito, Tome Vaz and Belchior Delgado,
lawyers in Porto, as well as the merchants in Porto Fernão Gomes [Mendes], Diogo
Gomes [Mendes] and Cristovão Rodrigues to demand all his rights in court or not,
in all cases, either already filed or to be filed in the future; and specially he
empowered any of these attorneys to charge and collect any amount of money
owed to him by anyone in Amsterdam from the insurance that Garcia Gomes
Vitoria, who was resident in the said city, made on the behalf of the grantor,
Domingos Lopes Vitoria, on an amount of sugar that came from Brazil on his
account [the grantor’s] in certain caravels, and which were lost; as well as to
charge and collect from anyone all the money and papers these might have in
Amsterdam proceeding from the said insurance or related to them.


**SR Nr. 587** - Notice served in the name of Miguel de Pas upon Francisco Mendes
de Medeiros concerning the arrest of goods belonging to Garcia Gomes Vitoria.

1612, November 13.
*Not. Arch. 129, fol. 132v.-133, Not. Jan Fransz. Bruyningh.*

Miguel de Pas, merchant of the Portuguese nation in Amsterdam, has the
following notice served upon Francisco Mendes de Medeiros. That same afternoon
the latter wanted to put an arrest on goods and moneys belonging to Garcia Gomes
Vitoria. Pas answered the town messenger that he has no goods belonging to
Gomes Vitoria. He now declares that he does not owe anything to Gomes Vitoria
but that on the contrary, the latter has a debt with him. Mendes de Medeiros
demands proof of this.

**SR Nr. 588** - Notice of Francisco Mendes de Medeiros served upon Miguel de Pas
that he is to give proof of his statement of November 13 last in the house of notary
David Mostart or of Pieter Bruys, both of whom know Portuguese.

1612, November 14.
*Not. Arch. 129, fol. 133-133v., Not. Jan Fransz. Bruyningh.*

**SR Nr. 604** - Deed in which Francisco Mendes de Medeiros removes the distraint
he had put on goods of Garcia Gomes de Vitoria and in which he withdraws the
power of attorney to Jeurian Iserman.

1613, February 5.
*Not. Arch. 376, fol. 59-59v., Not. Nicolaas and Jacob Jacobsz.*

Francisco Mendes de Medeiros in Amsterdam has a power of attorney from Gaspar
Marcos in Oporto to claim a sum from Garcia Gomes de Vitoria. In his place, he
authorized Jeurian Iserman, merchant in Emden, to levy a distraint on the goods of
Gomes de Vitoria. Since he has been paid by Gonçalo Lopes, the brother of De
Vitoria, he declares to remove the distraint and to withdraw the power of attorney
to Iserman.


**ADP, NOT, PO2, l. 41, fols. 17-18 (1615-5-22):**

Gaspar Marcos [Mendes], merchant in Porto grants a power of attorney to
Henrique Zacuto, José Francisco, Miguel de Paz and Manuel Lopes, residents in
Amsterdam, to charge and collect from Jerônimo da Costa, in Amsterdam, 29,000
réis, or what is to be found in a sentence that has been passed against him in this
city [Oporto], which they will present. The deed was neither signed nor registered,
and did not had effect.


**IC 5593, Luis Nunes:**

Confession session on November 2, 1596:

fol. 42
Seven or eight years ago, in the city of Oporto, on a day I cannot remember, nor
the month, he was at the house of Bras Gomes, New Christian, surgeon, absent,
resident in Lisbon, single, son of master Manuel, already dead, and he does not
know in which part of that city he lives. He was in his office with him, and with
Tristão Rodrigues Vila Real, New Christian, merchant who went bankrupt in the
city of Oporto and three years ago embarked to Flanders according to what he
heard; and Simão Ribeiro, mercer, already dead, son of Panteleão Ribeiro,
merchant. Being together the four of them, a woman farmer from outside of the
city brought two rabbits to the said Bras Gomes, which she brought because he had
treated a wound in the hand of her husband. When the woman was gone, the
confitent and the others asked the said Bras Gomes whether he ate from those
goods, and he replied that he did not but rather had them sold out, and on this
occasion, they disclosed [...]


**IL 3068, Francisco de Caceres**

fol. 31v.

10 He will prove that Henrique Sinel, Flemish, resident in the city of Oporto was a
trader and a merchant there, and that he made insurances on carracks and ships be
contracted outside the Kingdom. He [the defendant] had the same trade, receiving
many merchandise from outside the Kingdom, and prospering. The said Henrique
Sinel seemed to resent that. Once, the defendant had a signed posted on the corner
of the Rua Nova [main business street] saying that anyone who would like to have
an insurance done should go to his place and he would have them done. When the
said Henrique Sinel learned about that, moved by hatred and jealousy, he wrote
under it that he should provide guarantees that he would not run away, mocking
about the fact that he [the defendant] belonged to the [Jewish] Nation, to what he
replied

fol. 32
to the people who read the said inscription, that he was not a heretic as a partner of
the said Henrique Sinel, named Antonio Schot, about which he got very offended
and became his enemy [...]


**IL 728, Alvaro de Azevedo**

Impeachment articles:

fol. 56
21 He will prove that in the month of August 1618, he, the defendant, was about to
leave for this city [Lisbon], and the said Manuel de Andrade came to ask him to
pay a debt related to an insurance saying that he owed him, about which there were
many qualms, he, the defendant, asked him to show the papers which mentioned
what he owed. Since he had and showed none, he did not pay, about what the said
Manuel de Andrade got very irritated with him, the defendant, and said that he
already knew him [the defendant] as a thief, who wanted to maliciously default [or,
go bankrupt and run away], and many other similar words [...]

fol. 56v.

23 He will prove that Paulo Mendes de Carvalho, and his wife Antonia de Freire,
and his brothers and cousins are very suspicious against him, the defendant,
because owing the said Paulo Mendes 480,000 réis to him in a bill, the defendant
sued him before the royal judge of the city of Oporto (juiz de fora), and after a
sentence against him being passed, the judge confiscated a villa and the movable
properties therein, which he [the defendant] won in the auction [...]

fol. 57

25 He will prove that João Rodrigues Vila Real, his wife and children, and João
Rodrigues, his son in law, are all very suspicious against him the defendant,
because five years ago, more or less, owing the said João Rodrigues [Vila Real] to
him 180,000 réis, the defendant had him summoned for that; and because the said
João Rodrigues complained against that saying words against him the defendant,
the defendant swore that he would charge all he could from him and he would not
enter again in his account book; since some people asked the defendant not to
destroy the said João Rodrigues but rather wait for some while, the defendant did
so as long as someone else would pay to him because he would neither trade again
with the said João Rodrigues nor would he enter his account book. Thus, he was
given a bill from his son in law João Rodrigues [Preto], which he paid later under
threat from the court, complaining about what the defendant had done to his father
in law, being the cause of his absence, leaving for Brazil, and he [João Rodrigues
Preto] having to pay the debt, or most of it. Because of all that, their testimonies
should not harm the defendant.

fol. 127v.
Testimony of Manuel Travassos, solicitor, resident on the Rua de Santana, Old
Christian, 34 years old.

- About the 23rd article of impeachment, he said that he knew Alvaro de Azevedo
for eight years more or less, and that he ran his business [lawsuits], and he know
that he filed a lawsuit against Paulo Mendes de Carvalho [...] which he, witness,
sued him for an amount of money, whose exact amount he does not remember,
owing to a sentence that the said Alvaro de Azevedo won against the said Paulo
Mendes de Carvalho, in result of which, he, the witness, carried out the forfeiture
of a villa in Germundi, in the council [district] of Paiva, and because of the
litigation over the forfeiture, the said Alvaro de Azevedo and Paulo Mendes de
Carvalho, who used to be friends and compadres, became different and did not
speak any longer until the time that the said Paulo Mendes de Carvalho went
bankrupt and absconded, he does not know where to. He did not know whether for
the same reason the defendant stop speaking to his relatives [Paulo’s] as well. He
did not say further, except that he has been solicitor of all the lawsuits that the said
Alvaro de Azevedo had [..].


**ADP, PO1, l. 40, fols. 195v.-196 (1615-7-24 [sic.])**

Power of attorney granted by Alvaro do Azevedo, merchant in Oporto, to Father
Luis de Bastos and to Licentiate João Pimentel, residents in the port town of
Aveiro to defend his rights referring to sentence that the grantor sends with this
power of attorney to carry out sequestration and distraint in fifteen cases of sugar
or what is to be truly found to belong to Paulo Mendes de Carvalho, resident in
this city [of Oporto], arriving to the town of Aveiro on the ship of master Antonio
da Rua.

**IL 1400, Diogo Lopes Pinto**

He will prove that the said Paulo Mendes cousin of the said Paulo Lopes and Luis
da Cunha owed many thousands cruzados to
[4] many people, and he, the defendant, was one of the firsts to sue him, and for
that reason the other creditors rushed, and they also charged him for his
debts, and pressed him for them in such a way that he went bankrupt of his
credit, and defaulted over twenty five thousand cruzados; and complaining
about this, the said Paulo Lopes and Luis da Cunha said that the defendant
was the total cause for the said Paulo Mendes to break, and run out of any
credit, which resulted great damage which thereon they had relating to the
defendant, because
He will prove that in addition to the money of the houses that were actioned out,
the said Paulo Mendes remained indebted to the defendant and to his
brother, Manuel Pinto,
[5] and wishing the said Paulo Mendes to settle with the defendant; and other
parties; and because the defendant did not agree the other creditors did not
want the said settlement, and did not consent in it, for that reason he left the
said

fol. 128v.

city of Oporto, and with the passion [suffering] caused by the defendant he
passed away, which increased the hatred his cousins had against the
impeacher. For that reason, their sayings are legally null.


**ADP, PO2, l. 57, fols. 131-134 (1620-8-3):**

Diogo Homem Carneiro, gentleman (fidalgo), citzen of Oporto, and resident in the
city on the Rua Nova, and his wife, Dona Ana Calvos, had 8,000 réis of
emphyteusis and pension that Manuel Pinto paid them for the house in which he
lived. One of the houses had been let in emphyteusis to Paulo Mendes de Carvalho.
That house pays one tostão a year in perpetuity as tenure rights to the City Hall of
Oporto. That Paulo Mendes de Carvalho turned down to the house to merge it with
a plot and ruined buildings on the corner of the streets of São Miguel and that
which goes to the Taipas. On that place, he built the houses in which now Manuel
Pinto and his wife live. Manuel Pinto has the possession of those houses by virtue
of a title of the auction in which he won those forfeited houses made in 1615. As a
result, Diogo Homem Carneiro and Dona Ana Calvos sell the pension and
emphyteusis in the value of 128,000 réis [...]


**SR Nr. 756** - Protest of non-acceptance of a bill of exchange served in the name of
Miguel de Pas upon Manoel Carvalho.

1614, September 14.
*Not. Arch. 377b, fol. 342, Not. Jacob and Nicolaes Jacobs.*

Manoel Carvalho, drawee, receives in the name of Miguel de Pas, holder, a protest
of non-acceptance of al bill of exchange drawn on August 14, 1614 in Oporto by
Paulo Mendes Carvalho, good for 600 crusados (at 112 1/2 gr. a crus.), to be paid at
usance to João de Pas and Andre de Azevedo in Antwerp for the value received
from Alvaro de Azevedo, endorsed to Miguel de Pas on September 9, 1614.
Carvalho replies that he will not accept the bill of exchange since he has no money
from, the drawer. Luis Henriques from Lisbon acts as one of the witnesses.

**SR Nr. 761** - Protest of non-acceptance of a bill of exchange served in the name of
Miguel de Pas upon Manoel Carvalho.

1614, October 10.
*Not. Arch. 377b, fol. 378-378v., Not. Jacob and Nicolaes Jacobs.*

Manoel Carvalho in Amsterdam, drawee, receives in the name of Miguel de Pas in
Amsterdam, holder, a protest of a bill of exchange drawn on September 12, 1614 in
Oporto by Paulo Mendes Carvalho, good for 675 crusados (at 110 gr. a crus.) to be
paid to João de Pas and Andre de Azevedo for the account of Manoel Nunes from
Rome. Carvalho answers that he does not have any goods or money from the
drawer and refuses to accept the bill of exchange.

**ADP, NOT, PO2, l. 40, fols. 48v.-49 (1615-1-26):**

It was said by the him, Paulo Mendes de Carvalho, in my presence and of the
witnesses undersigned that it was true that he had sent to Amsterdam, in the states
of Flanders [i.e., the Netherlands], twenty cases of sugar, most of them white and
the rest muscovados, on the ship Pexepando [sic.] of master Brino [sic.] Volcardsz.
consigned to Manuel Carvalho, resident there. Since he had drawn a few bills of
exchange on the said Manuel Carvalho, particularly one of 500 cruzados on behalf
of Manuel de Andrade, he, Paulo Mendes de Carvalho, said that through this
public instrument was content, wished and ordered, which in effect he ordered, the
said Manuel Carvalho to pay and satisfy entirely and punctually the aforesaid bill
of exchange before any other bills of exchange. And if money will lack, it should
fall short in the [payment of the] others rather than of this, according to its content.
Furthermore, he said that he granted powers of attorney to Manuel de Andrade and
to Jorge and Andé Rodrigues de Andrade, his [Manuel’s] brothers, residents in
Antwerp, and to Daniel de Olanda, resident in the said Amsterdam, or to the person
who will be the commissioner of the said brothers whose names and aliases whose
names will be declared. His attorneys may all together or each by himself in
solidum to charge the said five hundred cruzados of the said bill of exchange from
the said Manuel de Carvalho on his behalf, the grantor, Paulo Mendes de Carvalho.
To everything they are to receive, they may give all the releases and quittances [...]
For the fulfilment of everything [clauses of the contract] he, Paulo Mendes de
Carvalho, bound his person and all his property, being movables or real estate,
present or future, rights and claims about them, and in particular the said sugar he
sent to Amsterdam; so that by one thing or another [property] the content of this
deed will be fulfilled and will have his due effect, and Manuel de Andrade will be
guaranteed on his rights related to it.

**SR Nr. 836** - Agreement between Fernando de Valencia and Daniel d'Olanda with
Manoel Carvalho concerning the payment of two bills of exchange.

1615, April 23.
*Not. Arch. 140, fol. 40v.-41, Not. Jan Fransz. Bruyningh.*
Fernando de Valencia and Daniel de Olanda, proxies of Jorge and Andres
d'Andrade in Antwerp, declare that they each have a bill of exchange payable by
Manoel Carvalho, drawn in Oporto by Paulo Mendes Carvalho for sum of 500
ducats at a rate of exchange of 112 and 111 gr. a ducat, respectively. The bill of
exchange of De Olanda was to be paid in Antwerp and a protest of this bill has
been drawn up. Manoel Carvalho declares himself willing to pay a sum of 134.17.6
p.

**SR Nr. 1125** - Gaspar Fernandes Trancoso and Francisco Nunes Homem,
Portuguese merchants in Amsterdam, declare that Mordechay Zacuto, Portuguese
merchant in Amsterdam, owes them 450 and 670 pounds Flemish for delivered
goods. Since Mordechay Zacuto is not able to pay, they allow him to pay the
capital plus interest in a year, and request the States of Holland and Westfriesland
to grant Zacuto “Sureté du corps”.

1617, March 14
*Not. Arch. 146, fol. 221v.-222, Not. Jan Fransz. Bruyningh.*

**SR Nr. 1175** - Sibrant Cornelisz., also acting for Mardochay Zacuto, hands over to
Willem van der Does, sheriff in Amsterdam, an authentic copy of a letter of safe
conduct that Zacuto obtained from the States of Holland and Westfriesland on May
24, 1617, asking the sheriff to adhere to it.

1617, June 3
*Not. Arch. 624, fol. 33-33v., Not. Sibrant Cornelisz.*

**SR Nr. 1341**- Samana Vides de Galilea, 50 years old, declares at the request of
Daniel Perez that when she was in Posna (Poland) about six months ago
Mardochay Zacuto took her to a ware-house stored with many bags of wool.
Mardochay showed her some wool in a cloth, saying that the wool he had bought
was of the same quality without saying from whom he had bought the wool.

February 14, 1618
*Not.Arch. 381, fol. 65; Not. J. and N. Jacobs.*


**ADP, NOT, PO2, l. 15, fols. 111-112v. (1600-12-14):**
Fernão Lopes Lamego, resident in Lisbon, staying in Oporto, arrested in the prison
of that city, declared that Manuel Gomes of Aveiro owed him 33,7000 réis or what
is truly to be found relating to a lawsuit before the royal judge *(juiz de fora)* of the
town of Aveiro. He granted a power of attorney to Domingos Gomes, resident in
Aveiro, to claim all his rights in and out of court, in Oporto, Aveiro and elsewhere,
and to charge and collect everything that the said debtor owes him.




### Oporto and Lisbon, Portugal, and Amsterdam, the Netherlands

**ADP, NOT, PO2, l. 36, fols. 62-63 (1612-10-8):**

[Gaspar Marcos Mendes] fazia e constituya seus sufficientes e Em todo abundantes
p.[dres] ha f.[co] mendes medejros e ha Cristovão mendes seu jrmão residentes em
Amstradama para que ambos juntos e quada hum delles jnsollidum possão cobrar e
arrecadar todas suas dividas fazenda de toda ha p.[a] e p.[as] que couza alguã per
qualq.[r] via lhe dever assj de dr.[o] como fazenda de toda sorte quanti.[de] e qualidade q
seja e de tudo ho q cobrarem e arrecadarem podera quada hum dar ha[s] paguas e
quaitaçõens p.[cas] e razas e da maSR Nr.[a] q pedidas e necessarjas forem para
segurança das p.[as] que tudo tera ho vigor Em juizo e fora delle q tivera se elle
outorg.[te] tudo dera e assinara e recebera e disse elle g.[ar] marcos que hos fazia p.[des]
seus na forma sobredita especial e expressamente p.[a] cobraren e arrecadarem e ha
suas mãos haverem de guarcia guomez portugues residente naquellas partes de
amstradama ou honde quer que Esteja huãs quoatro carguaçõens q elle outorg.[te] lhe
mandou desta cidade q jmportarão per verdad.[ra] e liquida conta quinhentos e onze
mil e duzentos e setenta e quatro r´s e allem disso cento e des livras de grossos q
elle cobrou dos seguros e sucedendo que reçebão elles p.[dres] seus e quada hum
delles ha dia copia hatras e qualq.[r] parte dellas poderão dar hao dito guarcia
guomez todas has paguas e quitanças.

**ADP, NOT, PO2, l. 36, fols. 63v.-64v. (1612-10-8):**

[...] poderem Cobrar de garcia gomes residente Em dita amstradama ou honde
quer que residir e for achado assi delle como de sua fazenda honde quer q Estiver
.ss. ho Conteudo Em huã letra que elle passou de contia de mil e trezentos e seis
cruzados ha valor do dito p.[o] nuz´ xabe sobre fernão gomez e diogo guomez m.[es]
nesta cidade e sobre elle sustitujnte g.[ar] marcos mendes ha quoal letra vay
protestada e recambiada e para poderem majs Cobrar delle garcia gomez ou de sua
fazenda hum conto e cento e noventa e sete mil e quinhentos e setenta e dous r´s q
desta cidade lhe remetteo Elle dito g.[ar] marcos mendes per Conta do dito p.[o] nunez
xabe e poderão Caussa propria ambos e jn sollidum cobrar pello melhor modo q
seja possivel assj por bem como per justiça e de tudo ho que receberen darão todas
has paguas e quitanças p.[cas] e razas e q pedidas e necessarjas forem assj e da maSR
Nr.[a] q se elle sustitujnte ou ho dito constitujnte p.[o] nuz´ xabe foram presentes e
sustabelleceo majs elle g.[ar] marcos mendes ha garcia gomez vitoria [senior]
cidadão desta cidade e ha d.[os] lopes victoria nella m.[es] ha todos e jnsollidum Com
hos poderes hatras e assj ho quis e outorgou [...]

**ADP, NOT, PO2, l. 36, fols. 82v.-83 (1612-10-27):**

[...] e Em especial para q quoalquer delles seus p.[des] possa cobrar e arrecadar toda
ha copia de dr.[o] que Em ho dito ostradama lhe deverem todas e quaisquer p.[as] de
seguros q guarcia guomes vitoria m.[or] que foi nelle dito na dita cidade fez em nome
delle dito outorguante d.[os] lopes vitoria sobre copia de açucares que por sua conta
lhe vinhão do brasil Em certas caravellas q se perderão e outrossi poderão
arrecadar de quoaisq.[r] p.[as] todo ho dr.[o] e papeis q tiverem no dito ostradama
procedido dos ditos seguros e toCantes ha Elles.

**IC 5593, Luis Nunes:**
Confession session on November 2, 1596:

Sessão de Confissão de 02 de novembro de 1596:

fol. 42

[...] avera sete ou oito anos na Cidade do Porto em h˜u dia que não he lembrado n˜e
de que mes estando elle em Casa de Bras gomes xpão novo Surgiam absente,
morador em lisboa, solteiro filho de Mestre Manoel yaa defunto, E não sabe em
que parte mora da dita Cidade no seu escritorio cõ elle, E com Tristam roiz' villa
Real, xpão novo mercador que quebrou na Cidade do Porto E avera tres anos que
se embarcou pera frandes segundo ouvio dizer: E Simão ribeiro marceiro yaa
defunto filho que foi de Pantaliam ribeiro mercador, E estando assi todos quatro
h˜ua molher lavradora de fora trouxe dous coelhos ao dito Bras gomes: os quais
dizia lhe trazia por lhe aver Curado seu marido de huão ferida em huã mão E Jda a
dita molher elle Confitente E os mais perguntarão ao dito bras gomes se comia elle
daquella fazenda: E elle Respondeo que não que os mãodava vender E com esta
occasiãm se descubrirão [...]


**IL 3068, Francisco de Caceres**

fol. 31v.

10 prov[ara] q Henrique Siner framengo morador na cidade do porto e era tratante
e mercador nella e q fazia seguros em naos e navios p.[a] fora do rejno, e uzando elle
do mesmo trato, lhe vinhão m.[tas] fazendas de fora do rejno e hia hem grande
crescim.to o q o dito Henrique Siner tinha e mostrava sintir m.to e entanto q
mandado elle r. por hum quartel na quina da rua nova q quem quizesse seguros
fosse a caza delle r. e lhos faria e q sabido por o d. Henrique Siner, levado de odio
e inveia, lhe pos por bajxo, q desse seegurança de não fogir remoqueandoo de ser
da nação, ao q elle respondeu

fol. 32
a gente q lia o d. escrito q. não era erege como era hum compahejro do d. Henrique
Siner q se chamava Ant.[o] Escotte do q m.[to] se agravou e fez seu imigo [...]


**IL 728, Alvaro de Azevedo**

fol. 56

21 Provara q no mes de Agosto de 618, estando elle Reo de Caminho para esta
Cidade, o d. Manoel dandrade lhe veio pedir q lhe pagace huã divida de h˜u seguro
q dis lhe devia, em q avia muita duvida, E elle Reo lhe pedio q lhe mostrasse
papeis, pe onde constava q lho devia. E por elle os não ter nem lhos mostrar lhe
não pagou, de q o d. M.[el] dandrade se agastou m.to contra elle R. e lhe dise q ia o
conhecia por ladrão, e se queria alevantar cõ sua faz.da e outras palavras
semelhantes, E elle R. o tomou pelo braço e o lançou pela porta fora, dizendo q o
não castiguava, porq sabia q era h˜u grande tolo per onde por todas as vias seu
test.[o] lhe não deve preiudicar.

fol. 56v.

23 Provara q Paulo mendes de Carvalho, e sua molher Antonia de freire, e seus
irmãos E primos são m.[to] suspeito[s] a elle R, porq.to devendolhe o dito Paulo
mendez quatro centos e oitenta mil r's de sua letra, elle R o demandou por elles
perante o Juiz de fora da Cidade do Porto, E depois de aver sentença contra elle,
deu penhora a huã quinta E os bens moveis q nella estavão, os quais elle arrematou 
a d. quinta, Se veo oponto a cauza D.[o] Jorge de ssa como 3.[o] possuidor, E ouve
sobre o Cazo muitas demandas pela qual razão o d. Paulo mendes e seu molher E
irmãos lhe ficarão cõ odio, e lhe são m.[to] suspeitos.

fol. 57:
25 Provara q Joam Roiz' villa Real, sua molher e filhos, E Joam Roiz' seu genro,
são m.to suspeitos a elle Reo, porq.to avera sinco anos pouco mais ou menos,
devendolhe o d. Joam Roiz' 180V – a elle Reo o mandou citar por elles E por o d.
Joam Roiz' se queixar dissso disendo alguãs palavras contra elle R., elle R. Jurou q
avia de cobrar delle tudo enteiram.te como podesse, porq não avia de entrar mais
no seu livro; E por alguãs pessoas rogarem a elle R. não não quisesse destruir o
dito Joam Roiz', e que lhe eperace alg˜u tempo elle R. o fez, cõ tanto que lhe
dessem pesso a lhe pagasse porq cõ o dito Joam Roiz' não avia de correr mais, nem
avia de entrar no seu livro. E assi lhe deu letra de seu genro Joam Roiz' [Preto], que
elle lhe pagou depois, cõ ameaças de Justiça, queixandoce delle Reo do fez a seu
sogro, por ser Cauza de se ausentar, E ir para o Brazil E elle pagar a divida, ou a
mor parte della, pelo q seus test.os lhe não devem preiudicar.

fol. 127v.

Inquirição de Manuel Travassos, solicitador de causas, m.or na R. de Santana, xv
de 34 anos:
- sobre o 23.[o] art.: “disse que haverá 8 anos que conhecia a Alvaro de Azevedo e
lhe corria com seus negocios, E sabia que trouxera huã demanda cõ paulo mendes
de carvalho [...] o qual Elle t.[a] solicitara sobre huã contia de dr.[o], q En particular
não Esta lembrado de quanto Era, E por virtude da sentença que o ditto Alvaro de
azevedo ouve contra o ditto paulo mendes de caravalho E por virtude della [sic.]
Elle t.a fazer Execussão En huã quinta sua que Esta en [f. 128] germundi do
conselho de paiva E por Rezão da demanda que sobre isto ouve, sendo de antes
amigos E compadres o ditto Alvaro de azevedo e paulo mendes carvalho fiquarão
diferentes E não correrão mmais atee o tempo que o ditto paulo mendes de
carvalho quebrara E se auzentou E não sabe pera onde, E que não sabia se pello
mesmo respeito deixara de correr com alguns parentes seus E mais não disse E do
costume que fora solicitador de todas as demandas que tivera o ditto Alvaro de
Azevedo [...]”

**ADP, PO1, l. 40, fols. 195v.-196 (1615-7-24 [sic.])**

[...] pera com Elle fazer penhora e embarguo em quinze caxas de açuquar ou has q
na verdade se acharem pertencer ha paulo mendes de Carvalho m.[or] nesta ci.[de]
vindas ha dita villa de avejro no navio mestre ant.o da rua [...]

**IL 1400, Diogo Lopes Pinto**


[Pr.] q o dito Paulo Mendes primo dos ditos Paulo lopes e Luis da cunha como
devia tantos mil tt.[dos] a
[4] m.[tas] pessoas, e elle R. ser dos prim.[ros] q o citou e damandou pella tal Resão
acudirão os demais acredores [sic.] a quem elle devia e por suas dividas os
demandarão tambem, e apertarão por ellas de sorte q quebrou de seu credito,
e se alevantou com mais de Vinte, e sinquo mil tt.[dos], e quaixandosse m.[to]
disto os ditos Paulo lopes, e Luis dacunha, disserão q o R fora a causa total
pera o dito Paulo Mendes quebrar, a fiquar de todo sem credito, de q
Resultou grandes danos q dali por diante tiverão ao R., porq.

[Pr.] q alem de o dinheiro das casas em q forão arrematadas ficou o dito Paulo
Mendes devendo ao R.
5 embar.[te] e a seu Irmão M.[el] pinto, e pretendendo o dito Paulo mendes fazer
concerto com o R; e mais p.[te]; e por elle R o não conçentir da sua p.[e] as
demais pesoas acredores não quiserão o tal concerto, nem consentirão nelle
por cuia causa se absentou da dita
f. 128v.
Cidade do Porto, e com paixão q teve cusada pello R faleçeo de q os ditos
seus primos acrescentarão odio q ia tinhão ao embarg.[te]. Por onde seus ditos
de dir.[to] são nullos.

**ADP, PO2, l. 57, fols. 131-134 (1620-8-3):**

Diogo Carneiro e Ana Calvos tinham 8,000 r’s de foro e pensão que Manuel Pinto
lhes pagava das casas em que vivia; esta pensão puseram num prazo que fizeram a
Paulo de Carvalho em relação a umas casas deles, das quais se paga 1 tostão, para
sempre, à câmara do Porto. Este Paulo de Carvalho derrubou estas casas para as
juntar a uns chãos e pardieiros na esquina da R. de S. Miguel e R. que vai para as
taipas, no qual local ergueu as casa sem que agora vive Manuel Pinto e a sua
mulher. Estas casas possui agora Manuel Pinto por uma carta de arrematação
dessas casas feita em 1615. Estando assim na posse das casas, paga de foro anual
os sobreditos montantes. Neste seguimento, Diogo Carneiro e Ana de Calvos
vendem-lhe esta pensão e foro no valor de 128,000 r’s [...]

**ADP, NOT, PO2, l. 40, fols. 48v.-49 (1615-1-26):**
[...] foy dito por elle paulo mendes de Cavalho na presença minha e das t.[as] abaixo
assinadas q Era verdade q elle tinha mandado ha Amstradama dos estados de
frandes vinte caxas de açuquares ha mayor p.[e] delles brancos e hos demais
mascabados em ha nao pexepando[?] mestre brino[?] volqers consignadas ha m.[el]
Carvalho la residente e porq.to tem passadas alguãs letras sobredito m.[el] carvalho e
em especial huã de quinhentos cruz.[dos] em favor delle m.[el] de andrade disse elle
paulo mendes de Carvalho q por Este p.[co] jnstr.[o] era contente e queria e ordenava
como em effeito ordenou q ho dito m.[el] Carvalho pague e satisfaça muy jntr.[a].[mte] e
com m.[ta] pontualidade ha dita letra atras declarada delle m.[el] dandrade pimr.[o] q n.[huã]
das outras letras e faltando d.[ro] seja antes nas outras q nella e jsto conforme ha ella
hao nella conteudo e disse mais q fazja elle p.[des] seus ha elle m.[el] dandrade e ha
jorge e amdre roiz' dandrade seus jrmãos residentes na villa de anveres e ha daniel
dolanda residente Em dita amstradama ou ha p.[a] que for comiss.[ro] [comissário] dos
ditos seus jrmãos cujos nomes e cognomes aqui hão os declarados ha todos jumtos
e ha quaoda hum por ssj jn solidum para poderem cobrar hos ditos quinhentos
cruzados da dita letra do dito m.[el] de Carvalho em nome delle outorg.[te] paulo
mendes de Carvalho e de tudo ho q receberem poderam dar todas has paguas e
quitanças [....] e pera ho cumprim.[to] de tudo obriguou elle paulo mendes de
carvalho sua p.[a] e todos seus bens e faz.[da] movel e de raiz prezentes e futuros dr.[to] e
auçõens delles e em especial hos ditos açuquares que assy md.[o] [mandado?] tem ha
dita austradama pera q por huã e outra couza e por ho conteudo nesta escritura se
cumpra e aja seu devido effeito e elle m.[el] dandrade Esteja seguro em ho q pera
rezão della lhe toca [...]