---
title: "Inquisitorial Prison As a Site of Cross-Cultural Encounter: The Case of
  Manuel Cardoso de Macedo aka Abraham Pelengrino Guer"
author: Ronnie Perelis
institution: Yeshiva University
volume: 15
year: "2018"
slug: inquistorial-prison-cross-cultural-encounter
event:
  name: "Early Modern Workshop: Jewish History Resources"
  theme: Space and Identity
  date:
    start: 2018-08-15
    end: 2018-08-16
sections:
  - {}
footnotes:
  - {}
bibliography:
  - {}
---
### Inquisitorial Prison as a site of Cross-Cultural Encounter

Prisons are often a site of cross-cultural encounter and religious illumination.
People from different ethnic and socio-economic backgrounds meet each other and
inevitably share ideas and experiences. The inquisitorial prison housed individuals
who were accused of crimes of conscience and thus the encounters that a prisoner
would have in a secret prison of the Inquisition would often enough center on
issues of belief and identity. I will look at a case from Lisbon in the early 1600s,
where individuals from different socio-economic, ethnic and religious backgrounds
meet and transform each other's religious outlook and commitments within prison
walls. I will pay attention to other, non-incarceratory places of meeting as a way of
appreciating the continuities and disruptions between life inside and outside of the
prison space.

Manuel Cardoso de Macedo (1585–1652) was an Azorean Old Christian
who found his way to Judaism after first embracing Calvinsim as a teenager living
in London and then discovering “the Law of Moses” in a cell he shared with an
accused Judaizer in the prison of the Lisbon Holy Office. Cardoso eventually
escapes Portugal along with members of a large converso family that he met in
prison and he converts to Judaism in Hamburg taking the Hebrew name of
Abraham Pelengrino Guer. He settles in Amsterdam where he lives within the
Portuguese community until his death in 1653.[^1]
																																																							 
Cardoso’s religious odyssey begins in England. His father was in the dye
and textile trade and conducted extensive business with England. He sent his
teenage son, Manuel to England in 1599 to master the language and apprentice
with some business associates presumably in preparation for a life in the family
business. While in England he encountered the Bible in English translation. This,
according to his telling in the *Vida* changed his life, setting off a series of
independently inspired religious inquiries. He writes: “Scripture was the first thing
that they placed in my hand after the ABC.”[^2]

He soon became enthralled with Protestant ideas, eventually rejecting “the
religion of his parents” for Calvinism. On trips back to the Azores to visit his
family he managed to keep his heresy a secret, but eventually word got out and he
was arrested while visiting São Miguel and was eventually sent to the Lisbon Holy
Office in 1608. It is in prison where he rejects Calvinism after his discovery of
Judaism. Cardoso eventually was released from prison and after connecting with a
group of Portuguese conversos he knew from his time in prison, he escaped Lisbon
for Hamburg where he formally converted, eventually settling in Amsterdam.
Around the 1620s he composed his spiritual autobiography *La Vida del
buenaventurado Abraham Pelengrino Guer.*

The encounters with ethnic and religious others within the warped “third
space” of the inquisitorial prison allow for much more than an exchange of new
ideas or the forging of new friendships. These encounters allow for religious
transformations and a radical shift in the subjects’ sense of self. The following
texts include scenes where space informs the development of Cardoso’s self-presentation as developed in his autobiography. I have selected examples from
both within his Inquisitorial experience and outside of it. I look forward to the
discussion of what the spatial elements of these scenes of encounter and self-reflection add to our understanding of this early modern life.
																																																																																																																																																																																		
[^1]: Cardoso wrote a spiritual autobiography later in his life while he was living openly as a
converted Jew in Amsterdam. The text was titled, “Vida do bemaventurado Abraham
Pelengrino” and has survived in a beautifully copied manuscript from 1769 in the collection of
the Ets Haim Library in Amsterdam (EH_49_A_15; http://etshaimmanuscripts.nl/eh_49_a_15/).
Prof. Yosef Kaplan disentangled the identity of this Old Christian convert to Judaism from
another convert with a similar Jewish name, Abraham Guer but with a different Christian name
who lived at a slight remove from our Pelengrino. See his “Jewish Proselytes from Portugal in 17th Century Amsterdam – The Case of Lorenzo Esudero,” [Hebrew] *Proceedings of the World
Congress of Jewish Studies* (1977): 87–101.
Bernard Teensma published a transcription of the autobiography with a Dutch translation and
very helpful biographical and linguistic annotations: “Manuel Cardozo de Macedo, ‘La *Vida* del
buenaventurado Abraham Pelengrino,’ edited by B. Teensma,” *Studia Rosenthaliana* 10
(1976):1–36. My citations are from this transcription and all translations are my own (hereafter,
*Vida*). I also make occasional use of the records from Cardoso’s two inquisitorial trials found in
the Torre de Tombo archive in Lisbon: *Processo de Manuel Cardoso*. Tribunal do Santo Ofício,
Inquisição de Lisboa, Instituto dos Arquivos Nacionais / Arquivo Nacional Torre do Tombo. PT-TT-TSO-IL-28-319 and PT-TT-TSO-IL-28-319-1. I have abbreviated these to: CM PT-TT for
the first trial and CM PT-TT II for the second trial.
Currently Dr. Alexander van der Haven at the Center for the Study of Conversion and Inter-Religious Encounters at Ben-Gurion University of the Negev is working on some very exciting
research into the life of Cardoso de Macedo. I look forward to his forthcoming work.
[^2]: “Consideray na Escritura, que foy a primeira couza que me meterão na mão depois de ABC”
(*Vida*, 7).



Cardozo de Macedo, Manuel. *La vida del buenaventurado Abraham Pelengrino.* Ed. B.
Teensma, *Studia Rosenthaliana* vol. x 1976. pp.1-36.

*Processo De Manuel Cardoso.* Tribunal do Santo Ofício, Inquisição de Lisboa, Instituto
dos Arquivos Nacionais / Arquivo Nacional Torre do Tombo. PT-TT-TSO-IL-28-
319 and PT-TT-TSO-IL-28-319-1.


<ins>Related Secondary Sources:</ins>
Alberro, Solange. *Inquisición y sociedad en México, 1571-1700*. México: Fondo de
Cultura Económica, 1988.

Bodian, Miriam. *Dying in the Law of Moses: Crypto-Jewish Martyrdom in the Iberian
World.* Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2007.

Kagan, Richard L., and Abigail Dyer. *Inquisitorial Inquiries: Brief Lives of Secret Jews
and Other Heretics.* Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2004.

Lewin, Boleslao Gaspar de Alfar, Juan de León, and Francisco Botello. *Confidencias de
dos criptojudíos en las cárceles del Santo Oficio, México, 1645-1646.* Buenos
Aires: Talleres Gráficos, Julio Kaufman, 1975.

Perelis, Ronnie. *Narratives	from	the	Sephardic	Atlantic:	Blood	and	Faith.*	
Bloomington:	Indiana	University	Press,	2016.




### Cardozo de Macedo, Manuel. *La vida del buenaventurado Abraham Pelengrino.* Ed. B.
Teensma, Studia Rosenthaliana vol. x 1976. pp.1-36.


I.
*A Heretic at the Palace, a Free Man in London:
A short time after his introduction to English life Cardoso embraced
Protestantism. He came under the protection of a certain English nobleman who
brought him to the palace to receive a special stipend for neophytes from Queen
Elizabeth. In this scene he describes a brazen encounter with the Spanish
ambassador at the palace.*[^1]

And thus the Spanish ambassador was there, and seeing me there he recognized me
as Portuguese and that I entered into the churches (cerchas), and that I did not go to
mass at his home like the other Portuguese and Spanish who were there [in
England], whom I always stayed away from. . . . He [the ambassador] asked me
why, being Portuguese I didn’t come to mass?
I responded saying: Your Excellency should keep track of his own subjects and not
me. (8)

*This led directly to his arrest on a return trip home to the Azores.*

II.
*First Arrest:*
Seeing my temerity the Bishop changed his disposition towards me (se demudou
de coor) and he did not know how else to resolve the situation other than to have
me taken away by calling the Justice and the constable, and in the mean time he
engaged me with words. . . . .and they took me to the public prison (literally the
chains) where they placed me in a cell alone. My father gathered in his home, very
sad, and he closed the doors and windows as he was embarrassed (afrontado), and																																															 
he desired that no one from his house should send me bedding nor food or any
other thing. In the end my basic necessities came from the house of my
grandparents. (8)

At the end of 8 dias, because the Bishop could not secure me, he had me sent to the
Terceira until there would be a ship going to Lisbon. After sailing to Terceira and
arriving there they placed me in a dungeon (calaboso), in the prison (aljube) where
I was for two months, without talking to anyone, suffering greatly from the ill
treatment of the house. At the end of this time period they put me on board a
caravel to Lisbon, and they placed me in shackles, and I placed my eyes on them
and considered all of the injustices that were done to me and I said with great tears:
Lord, it is not for being a thief or an evildoer, but rather in order to find the path to
my salvation!

When I came to Lisbon they brought me to the Inquisition, and they stuck me in a
sad cave. On the following day they brought me before the tribunal where all of the
tyrannical persecuting Inquisitors were seated. And they asked me, as was
customary, who I was, what was my name and why I was imprisoned. And I
responded that. “I was called Manoel Cardozo de Macedo; From what I
understand, I am imprisoned for being a Calvinist” (9).

*From page 9-11 there is a long polemical section where Cardoso recounts how he
challenged the Inquisitors using basic protestant arguments. Because they could
not refute his arguments they placed him in solitary confinement.*

III.
*Solitary Confinement*
. . and with this they turned to send me to prison, in which I was for five months
without them talking to me at all, neither did they give me a bed or a shirt with
which to dress; and thus I slept on a small one of straw, enduring cold and hunger
–as God knows- filled with filth, and with time I could no longer walk, I developed
weakness in one of my legs, of which I will never regain control over (da qual
nunca serey s[enho]r) // because in the house that I was in, it being summer, had
water passing through the walls.

*Solitary confinement was certainly getting to him; he describes requesting an
audience with the Inquisitors where he demanded to know his fate:*

I said “Sir, I come in order to know if your Lordships have decided to kill me in
this house, because if it would be thus I would have patience, because I am good
with God. If you are holding me in order to burn me, please give me another, better
house and I can live until I reach that state.” He responded, “You have more than
what you deserve. There is no better house. Call out for the devil that speaks in
you, and see if he will help you, or throw him out and come and take advantage of
the mercy of this Table[^2]. . . (top of page 12)

They took me from the prison where I was till that other day and they turned to
bring me to the Table, teeming with vipers, and the President (of the gathered
inquisitors) said to me:
“We have not considered your deeds, but rather we looked at whose son you are
and to your lineage, and using the mercy which is our custom to offer to all, thus
we wish to take you out of the place where you are and to give you a your clothes,
and place you in the company of an upstanding gentlemen of this city. He is
elderly and thus you should obey him as it is proper, cleaning up for him and doing
the necessary duties of a servant. Perhaps there the Holy Spirit will touch you so
that you can convert (back) to the milk of the Church from which your nursed.”

I thanked them and they brought me into the company of a certain Henrique Dias
Milão who was imprisoned for being a *Judeo negativo*.[^3] There they gave me a
change of dress with which I cleaned myself of the filth that was on me. I was very
happy with the good company. I realized that my father would be horrified to see
me.[^4]

IV
*Introduction to Judaism*
Six days later they called Henrique Dias to the tribunal (Meza), and they gave him
a pamphlet (libelo) enumerating his sins in which they outlined how he was a Jew,
that he kept the Sabbath, and that he did not eat any of the forbidden foods
enumerated in the Law, as well as other customary practices. The disgraced man
seemed emotionally spent, he was saying that it was all false testimonies that they
pinned on him, because he was never a Jew; he then took the pamphlet and threw it
on the bed. I picked it up and reading it I asked him, “are there really people who
observe that religion, because everything that was in that book was in accord with
Scripture. . . .?”

The good elderly gentleman responded: Son, I don’t know anything about it; I
know that I am imprisoned unfairly. Please let me be.
																 
Not wanting to bother him any more I began to pace around the house (caza),
thinking about that paper, and seeing that in this sort of house one’s thoughts are
more subtle (delgado) than when they are in another location, a certain proposition
of Saint Jerome came to me. . . . (p.12)
. . . . .

I, seeing in my imagination this and many other concepts that would come to me,
like the nature of the trinity, I felt myself so oppressed by these thoughts that I
arose at 2 past midnight, unable to sleep, I sat on the foot of the bed and raised my
eyes to heaven through a small opening and I said: Lord, help me, because I have
lost my Salvation. And I awoke without any form of religion, erasing /rejecting all
of the Scriptures and not believing in anything contained in them, taking it all as a
fable. In the end I was made into a libertine. (13)

*With his Calvinism in disarray he decides to save his skin. He pleads for mercy
from the Inquisitors claiming a temporary/youthful insanity he is welcomed back
by the Inquisitors but he has already resolved to learn more about Judaism.*

V.
*Reform School, an incarceratory seminar on Judaism*

I was returned to the prison and I left there with the Auto (da Fe) of April 5, 1609
with a sambenito. There they read my sentence. Then on the following day I was
sent to the “General Schools” (Escolas Gerais) as is the custom. Since my mind
was never at peace, I would approach certain people and I would ask them. “ Why
did they arrest you?” (13).
And if they would tell me that it was for being a Jew I would follow up by asking
them if indeed they were [Jews]. If they would tell me that indeed they were I
would begin to find out what it was all about and as they would tell me I would
take away that which I found most to my liking. At the end of two months I left the
Schools and I went to live with the children of Henryque Diaz Milão, my [former]
cellmate who suffered at the same Auto, may his bones be avenged along woth the
rest (13).

*A Religious Mission*
I went with the intention of observing the Sabbath, and little by little getting to
know more about the Law of Moses. Because it seemed to me to be the true one.
Before I had no awareness of the Law of Moses; in my father’s house it was often
said that the Jews worshipped a “Toura”/Female Bull. I went ahead, gathering as
much information about it (Judaism) as I could with the utmost secrecy, . . I was
sure that no one noticed who I was. I began to develop affection for the people of
the Nação, taking their travails as if they were mine (13).

VI.
*Cardoso writes that he orchestrated a failed escape from Portugal for a group of
Conversos. Upon their arrest Cardoso describes presenting himself as the ring
leader to the Inquisitors, insisting that he was the only one to blame, his strategy
worked to get the others out but he was left to suffer in jail.*
This I did in the following manner so that by the end of 32 days the others were
released, but I they kept inside and they avenged their frustration at not being able
to condemn the others on me. They were not able to get at the truth of the matter
and they could not do ill to them because it was all in my mouth. They kept me
imprisoned until the next Auto [da Fe] without ever being able to get one word
from me and thus I was set free.
While I was imprisoned they placed me in the company of a Jew from Salonica
who was arrested for entering into the Kingdom without a “sign/sinal”. He was
named Joesph Bar Jahacob. I acted as if I was debating him and in that way,
without anyone noticing, I left his company transformed into one of the teachers of
the Jews of those parts (14).

I left and went to stay at the home of a certain Manoel Rodrigues Pinheiro, a native
of Celorico, he was a widower with three single daughters, all good Jews and God
fearing. I was at his house, with the appropriate honor, for 10 months. Learning
and sharing that which I believed with many of the Nação, many who were those
who praise God, teaching them, because as I said I left as a good teacher from the
company of that good Jew whom God sent to that place for my good (14).

*From a Merchant’s Mansion to a Danzig Prison*
*After the arrest of a certain “Jew” with whom he had spent time with, Cardoso
realized he had to escape while he could. He makes it out and arrives in Hamburg
where he is well received by members of the Dias Milão family- now going by
Abensur. He is circumcised and immerses in the mikveh and takes the name
Abraham. (p.14, first paragraph of chapter 5)*

VII
Thirteen days later those gentlemen sought to remedy my livelihood and sent me to
Danzig to be in the company of Mosseh Abensur, one of the sons of Henrique Diaz
Milão with whom I became friendly. At the end of three months a Mulato died
inside the house (died on us) . . . when he died—May God Save us- the people rose
up saying that we killed him in order to drink his blood as a sacrifice as apt of our
upcoming holiday (Páscoa), seeing that it was 5 days before Quipur (14-15).

*Abensur pleads with Cardoso that they should leave but Cardoso assures Abensur
that he will stay behind to protect the property. In the chaos of the attack on their
property Cardoso is brought to prison where he is housed with some unsavory
characters.*
In that prison I was stuck between 5 thieves and murderers, may it be that the
justice done unto me there will count as payment for my sins and in this way I
would take a month before the Inquisition than a day in that prison. . . .What I most
felt was that if my father could see me he would say that this was recompense for
straying from the paths that he showed me. This wore me out and I turned to God
and asked him to liberate me, which he did as a Compassionate Father after 49
days (15).

*He leaves the prison and makes his way back to Hamburg. He is a broken man.
Suffering from a sort of leperosy. The doctors eventually heal him. He theologizes
his pain and suffering:*
Considering that they were given to me to test whether I was strong in His Law or
not (15).

VIII
*He ends his narrative by reflecting on his journey from among his idolotrous
brothers to the House of God:*
And the children of the strangers, those who join unto A[donay], in order to serve
Him and in order to the name of A[donay], in order to be His servants, guarding
the Sabbath from profaning it, holding fast to my covenant, Lo I will bring them to
my holy mountain and i will rejoice with them in my house of prayer. . .For my
house will be called a house of prayer; so says A[donay] God to all of the nations;
the Oppressed of Israel will be gathered. I will still gather unto Him his oppressed
                              Isaiah (56:6--‐8).[^5]

IX
**In the Land of Liberty: Judaism on the street**
*Attached to the manuscript copy of Cardoso de Macedo’s Vida is a truncated
account of a debate that Cardoso has with someone from his Calvinist past, an
English friend he encounters many years later on the streets of Amsterdam. The
copyist refers to this encounter in his title of the text as “a desputa y controvérsia
que teve aqui com hum Yngrês, ao qual comvenseo y reduziu à Verdade” (a
disputation and controversy that he had here with an Englishman, whom he
convinced and reduced to the Truth). The text, as it has survived, consists of a
long paragraph describing how he met this old friend in Amsterdam and a highly
stylized record of the theological debate they entered into regarding the																																																		 
immutability of the Divine law and its implication for belief in Judaism versus
Christianity. This account of the debate as it has been preserved is obviously
incomplete: Cardoso’s Protestant interlocutor is improbably left with the last word
in the debate, making the triumphalist title given to the piece by the copyist of 1769
a misplaced curiosity.
The encounter with this old friend is a highly charged event. Many years have
passed and Cardoso is a very different man now than when he was a young student
in England. Not only has he made a radical religious choice in his conversion to
Judaism, Cardoso’s physical state has been greatly altered: he was once young,
rich and successful and now he is poor, alone and his body is broken by the
travails of his wanderings.
He begins this section by describing the place where they met:*

Going to the Bourse I had an encounter well outside of what I expected to find
there, I met an Englishman, a native of Topham. . .

*At first Cardoso tries to avoid his old friend:*

Seeing him I vaguely recognized him and I diverted my path from his; he also
vaguely recognized me, and he approached me, eyeing me [intently] as if putting
his face into mine.
I saw that he was following me from one part to another, and every time I walked
my leg, which is weak from the sufferings I have received,[^6] would go more lame.
He was confused to not recognizing because of the “geito della”, still he became
sure from the appearance of my face, and approaching me he said to me in English:
“Do you recognize me?” and I responded to him in Flemish: “I don’t understand”.
Taking into acount more my tone of speaking [then the actual words] he said: “I
know you well Manoel. What is with your foot?"
I, seeing that I was in a free country and that it mattered little if I was recognized, I
said to him: “The state of poverty that I find myself in makes me want to avoid
you, now that this is how it is, how are you and what brings you here,
Christopher?”
																																																							 



###Cardozo de Macedo, Manuel. *La vida del buenaventurado Abraham Pelengrino.* Ed. B.
Teensma, *Studia Rosenthaliana* vol. x 1976. pp.1-36.


I.
e assy asistía aly Enbaxador espanhol, e vendo-me este veyo a ssaber que eu era
Portuguêz, e que emtrava nas cerchas, e que não hia à misa à sua caza com[o] hião
os mays Portuguezes e Espanhóis que aly estavão, dos quais eu sempre me
afastava. Sabendo-o como digo me emcontrou em Palácio em companhia do
fidalgo meo amigo, e tomándo- me de parte me dixe por que couza, sendo
Portuguêz, não hia à misa.
Eu lhe respondi: que Sua Exelência tivese conta com seus criados e não commigo.
(8)

II.
Vendo o Bispo esta temeridade se demudou de coor, e se não soube rezolver
mais que mandar esconder de mim, a chamar ao Juis de Fora e Coregedor, e em
meyo tempo entreter-me com palavras. Os quais em continente vierão e me
levarão à cadea pú[b]lica, onde me meterão em huma câmara só. Meu pay se
recolheo logo em caza muy triste, e fechou portas e janelas como afrontado, e sem
querer que de sua caza me viese cama nem comer ou couza alguma, finalmente que
o nessesário me vinha de caza de minha avó.

Ao cabo de 8 d[ias], por me não ter o Bispo seguro, me mandou // à Ylha Terseira, até que ouvese embarcasão para Lixboa. Quando me embarcavão
despov[o]ou-se a ylha por me verem chegar à Terc[eir]a, onde me meterão em hum
calaboso, no aljube, donde estive 2 mezes, sem falar ninguém commigo, padesendo
muy tos traba- lhos de mao tratamento da caza. Ao cabo delles me embarcarão em
huma carabela ara Lixboa, e botarão-me hums grillos, os quais botando-mos pus os
olhos no séu diante de todas as justisas q[ue] hião commigo, e dixe com muytas
lágrimas: “S[enho]r, não hé por ladrão nem por maofeitor, hé por buscar o caminho
de miña Salvasão" (8-9).

Quando cheguey a Lixboa levarão-me logo à Ynquisisão, e meterão me em huma
triste cova, e ao outro dia me levarão à Meza onde estavão todos os persiguido- res
tiranos Ynquizidores, e preguntarão-me que[m] era, como custumão, e como me
chamava, y por que vinha prezo. Eu lhes respondy que me chamava Manoel
Cardozo de Macedo; „Venho prezo, ao que cuido, por Calvino" // (9).

III.
. . . e com isto me tornarão a mandar à prisão, na qual estive 5 m[eses] sem me
falarem mais, nem me quererem dar cama nem carniza que vestir, y assi durmia em
huma peq[ue]na de palha, pasando frios e fome quantas el Dio sabe, cheo de toda
ymundíxia, que já a cabo de tempo não podia piar, e assi ganhey frialdade em
huma perna, da qual nunca serey s[enho]r, // porque a caza donde estava, sendo
verão, manavão as paredes água (11).

Vendo-me acabado y entendendo que todas estas avezasoims erão para me
abrandar, pedy Meza ao Alcalde, o qual me levou, y falando o cruel Presidente
Manoel Álvares Tavares me dixe: „Que quereis?". Digo: ,,S[enho]r, venho a ssaber
de Vosas Señorías se determinão de me matar naquela caza, porque sendo assy
terey pasênsia; por-me-ey bem com D[eu]s. E se me guardão para me queimar,
dêm-me outra caza milhor e meo fato, e vivirey até chegar a esse estado".
Respondeo : „Tendes mais do que mereseis. Não há outra caza milhor. Chamay
pello diabo que fala em vós, e vede se vos val, ou votay-o de vós, e valer-vos-á a
mizericórdia desta Meza. E assy: levai-o, Alcaide, que se ou vera outro peor, se
vos dera, e não milhor" (12).

*Capitulo 3*
Tomou-me à prizão aonde estive athé o outro dia, e tornarão-me a levar à Meza
chea de bíboras, e me dixe o Presidente [d] ellas : „Nós havemos considrado não
em vossas obras, senão em cujo filho sois e em vosa gerasão, e juntamente uzar da
mizericórdia que custumamos dar a todos, e assy vos queremos tirar donde estais, e
dar-vos vosso fatto, e por-vos em comp[anhi]a de hum homem onrado desta
cidade. Velho hé, assy o obedesereys como a esse, y alimpando-o e fazendo-lhe o
nessesário por servidor, podrá ser que ahy vos tocará o Espírito S[an]to, para que
vos con- vertais ao leyte da Ygreja que mamasteis." Dei-lhe eu os agradesimentos,
e leváron- me à comp[ani]a de hum Henrique Dias Milão, que estava prezo por
Judeo negativo. Aly me derão meo fatto com que me alimpey da ymundisia que
trazia. Fiquey muy contente com a comp[anhi]a por ser boa, e conhesendo a meu
pay ficou espantado de me ver (12).

IV.
Passados que forão 6 d[ias] chamarão à Meza ao Henrique Dias, e lhe derão o
libelo de suas culpas, no qual lhe manifestavão como era Judeo, que guardava o
Sabat, e que não comia as couzas proibidas // na Ley, e outras particularidades que
custumão a dar. O desgrasiado homem veyo muy agastado, dizendo que tudo erão
falsos testemunhos que lhe punhão, porque elle nunca havia sido Judeo, e tomou o
libelo e votou-o sobre a cama. Eu tomei-o e lendo-o lhe dixe se havia jente que
guardasse aquela religão, porque tudo o que aly estava concordava com a
Escritura, y se o Sabat não era domingo, que era o séptimo dia em que D[eu]s
repouzou.
Respondeu-me o bom velho: „Filho, não sey nada. Sey que estou prezo
injustamente, e deixai-me."
Não querendo afligi-lo mais me pus a pasear pella caza, considerando naquelle
papel, e como em semelhante caza estão os pensamentos mais delgados que em
outra parte, me veyo à memória huma proposisão de São Jerónimo que havia lido
sobre o Sab (p.12)

. . . . .


Eu, vendo na ymaginasão ysto e outras couzas que me ocorião, como era na
Trinidade, me vi tão persegido de pensamentos que me levantey às duas oras
depois da meya noute sem poder durmir, e me pus em pé na cama, e pus os olho no
ceo por huma fresta, e dixe: „S[enho]r, acude-me, que me veijo perdido de m[inh]a
Salvasão". He deitando-me amanhesi sem hum modo de religão, borando todas as
Escrituras e não creher nada delias, e ter tudo por fábula. Finalmente fiquey libertino formado (12-13)

V.
Cap[ítulo ] 4.
Recolhi-me à prisão, e sahy no Auto que se fez em 5 de Abril de 1609 com
sanbenito. Nelle me leerão a sentensa, e logo ao outro dia me mandarão às Escolas
Gerais como hé costume, e nunca aquietando com o juizo me chegava a algumas
pessoas que me paresião, y lhes preguntava: „Porquê vos prenderão?", e dizendo-
me que por Judeu lhe tornava a preguntar se o avia sido. Se me dezia que sy. Tirá-
lla delle couza era, y dizendo-mo tomava dahy o que me paresia. Ao cabo de 2
m[eses] sahy das Escolas, e fuy pouzar com os filhos de Henryque Diaz Milão,
meo comp[anheir]o, o qual padeseo no mesmo Auto, q[ue] vingados sejão seus
osos como os demais. (13)

Fuy com presuposto de guardar o Sabat e yr pouco a pouco tomando nottísia da
Ley de Mosseh, porque me pareseu ser a verdadeira, da qual de antes não havia
tido nottísia, por cuidar que os Judeos adoravão huma toura, como em caza de meo
pay se dezia. Fui recolhendo della // o mais que podia com todo o secretto do
mundo, entendendo q[ue] era Judeo e que ninguém o sabia nem entendia de nem
entendia de mim. Ao que me pareseo fuy tomando afeisão à gente da Nasão, e
pasar-me a seus trabalhos como propios (13).

VI.
Ao outro dia me levarão à Meza, e foi meu livramento o milhor que pude, não
falando nunca nos que não tomarão, mas antes livrando as pesoas que comigo
prenderão. O qual fiz de maneira, que a cabo de 32 d[ia]s os soltarão, e a mim me
deixarão dentro, e por se23 vingaren em não poder24 condenar a ninguém, que
elles não deixavão de entender a verdade, mas não podião mal fazer, porque em
minha boca estava tudo, tiverão-me preso thé outro Auto, sem poderem nunca tirar
de mim huma só palavra, no qual sahi solto y livre.

No tempo que estive prezo me meterão em companhia de hum Judeo de Selonique,
o qual prenderão por entrar no reino sem sinal, chamado Joseph Bar Jahacob. Pusme por vezes em disputa mais por tirar delle que por outra couza, e foi de maneira
que, // sem ninguém o entender, que sahi de sua comp[anhi]a feito mestre dos
Judeos daquelas partes.

Sahido que fuy, me fuy pouzar em caza de hum Manoel Rodrigues Pinheiro,
natural de Celorico, viuvo com 3 filhas donzelas, todos bons Judeos e tementes del
Dio. Aly estive em sua caza, com a onra devida, 10 m[eses], conhesendo e
comunicando o que professava com m[ui]tos da Nasão, e a algums - louvores al
Dio - ensinando, porque como diggo, sahy bom mestre da comp[anhi]a do bom
Judeo que el Dio mandou aly para meu bem. (14)

VII
Dahy a 13 d[ia]s, procurando aqueles S[enho]res // algúm remédio de m[inh]a
vida, me mandarão a Danzique, a estar em comp[anhi]a de Mosseh Abensur, hum
dos filhos de d[i]to Henrique Diaz Milão. Chegado eu lá me fes afeta de amigo.
A cabo de 3 m[eses] moreu-nos hum mulato em caza, e o cazo como guardo para
my. Morto que foy - el Dio nos livre - se levantou o povo, dizendo que nós o
havíamos morto p[ar]a lhe bebermos o sangue em sacrefísio na Páscoa que vinha,
isto era 5 d[ia]s antes de Quipur. (14-15)

Eu na prisão me meterão entre 5 ladroins // matadores, que as justisas que em mim
fizera, el Dio mas deconte em pago de meos pecados, e assy tomara hum mez antes
de Inquizisão q[ue] hum dia de tal prisão. Cada dia cu[i]dava q[ue] sahia a padeser,
e já não sentia a morte por estar muy emfadado da vida e cansado de trabalhos. O
q[ue] mais sentia era q[ue] se meo pay soubesse, q[ue] diria q[ue] eu fuy a pagar o
q[ue] fiz em me tirar dos caminhos q[ue] elle me ensinou. Isto me cansava y me
fazia pedir ao S[enho]r me livrase, o qual Elle fez como Pay de Mizeri- córdia a
cabo de 49 d[ia]s. (15)

considra[n]do mos dava para provar se estava fixo na Sua Ley, ou não.


VIII
q[ue] tenho obrigasão contìnuamente de alabá-lo por me tirar de entre meos irmãos
e me dar lugar entre seu Povo, p[ar]a q[ue] venha a alcansar o q[ue] Elie diz p[o]r
boca do Propheta Isaya, cap[ítulo] 56, v[ers]os 6, 7, etc.: „У hijos de los estranhos ,
los ajuntados a A'donay' para servirlo y p[a]r[a] amar a nombre de A[donay]t p'a'ra
ser a Elle por siervos , todo guardando Sabat , de abiltarlo travantes en ту
firmamento , traer-los-hé en monte de ту santidad , y alegrar-los-hé en caza de ту
orasión , у sus alsasiones y sacrifisios por voluntad sobre ту ara , que ту caza caza
de oración será llamada 33 ; dicho de A [donay] Dios a todos los pueblos apanhan
enpujados de Israel , aun apanharé a él a sus empujados " Que seja em nossos dias
(15).

IX
*A desputa y controvérsia que teve aqui com hum Yngrês, ao qual comvenseo y
reduziu à Verdade*

Andando na bolsa bem fora do q[ue] havia de emcontrar, encontrey com hum
Yngrês natural de Topsham . . .
Vendo-o entreconhesi-o e desviey-me delle; elle também me entreconheseo, e foise chegando a mym, olhando-me sempre encaradamente no rostro. Eu q[ue] vy
q[ue] tanto me seguia para huma parte e para outra, cada vez q[ue] andava me fazia
mais manco da perna q[ue] tenho da frialdade q[ue] receby em meos trabalhos.
Elle comfuzo em me desconheser pello geito della, todavia se ratificou no aspecto
do rostro, e chegando-sse a myn me dixe em Ingrêz: “Conhese-me?” Eu lhe
respondi em Framengo: “Não entendo”. Elle tomando mais o tom da falla q[ue]
meo ditto, dixe: “Bem vos conheso, Manoel. Q[ue] tendes no pé?” Eu, vendo
q[ue] estava em terra livre y que ymportava pouco o conheser-me, lhe dixe: “O
estado em q[ue] estou de povreza me fez desviar de vós, mas já q[ue] assy hé,
como estais e a que visteis aqui, Cr[is]tóvão?” (16). 

[^1]: My translations try to remain faithful to the original as presented by Teensma and are also
committed to offering a lucid text to the reader. They are at an early stage and often come off as
rather rough. Much more work is needed to render them smoothly into English and I hope the
discussion at the workshop will help me along that path.
[^2]: In translating these passages I see new concepts emerge. The use of “caza”/house to describe
prison facilities, the term meza/table to describe the tribunal’s desk points to the ways that these
domestic terms which evoke warmth and comfort can be turned into signifiers of harsh justice
and punishment.
[^3]: In Inquisitorial proceedings a suspect who consistently denies the charges against them and
proclaims their innocence is referred to as a “negativo”- some one who denies the accusations.
[^4]: Not sure if this is a non sequitur or if something is missing. Is he invoking his father because of
his virulent anti-Jewish sentiment?
[^5]: See pp206-7 in Narratives 2016 especially foot note 357.
[^6]: In the Vida Cardoso describes the severe beatings he received while in prison in Danzig in the
aftermath of an attack on his Jewish patrons the Díaz Milão family.